awesome well life hey guys being a very
long time it's been eight months since
I've done a discussion like this so
let's get straight back into it okay so
I have with me
Asuma Zod so ah so a few would be more
than happy to I'd love to for you to
introduce yourself okay normally I need
no introduction I'm well known within
the really small demi-monde of digital
vegan activism that's where most people
watching this video will know me from
but that's only the latest hat I've been
wearing um I have a background in
philosophy I noticed Derek you normally
do describe yourself as a philosopher
rather than political philosopher or
rather than someone involved in in
politics I guess I can say
intellectually I started off in the
Western tradition ancient Greek and
Roman as well as German 19th century and
all that stuff you probably listen to my
youtube channel I grew up in an extreme
left-wing household so I also got a
background in economics as part of my
progress kind of emerging from communist
and socialist ideology I started to
understand capitalism and understand how
deeply flawed a lot of those sources
were but I also read stuff like Karl
Marx for myself along with Lenin Stalin
what-have-you
at the end of process though I was
generally quite dissatisfied with
Western European thinking and philosophy
and then I moved on to Buddhist
philosophy and that was about ten years
of my life doing Buddhist philosophy and
again if you guys know my channel you'll
know I didn't turn off my brain and
suddenly become uncritical or apolitical
I was interested in slavery in poverty
and real history moral problems I was a
very mud and blood you know Buddhist
philosopher and still again still cared
about politics ill cared about economics
at the end of that period of my life
that was when I started to get more
serious about veganism which is also
which is kind of interesting in itself
and you know hmm you know in each of
those periods I was looking for how I
could make a positive difference in the
world and I'd become strictly vegetarian
back in the year 2000 the year 2000
doesn't sound like all that long ago but
I really never heard the word vegan back
then so it existed but you know the the
prominence of the word vegan hadn't come
up yet so that just really briefly at
that time you know I already thought
that wearing
there was immoral but I didn't describe
myself as as vegan and my diet was
probably 90% vegan but you know I
identified as strictly vegetarian and
then when I mean that the transition to
being vegan that was not really a
significant change in my life but it
made my my actions consistent with my my
purpose that that extra step um but you
know I didn't think of vegan activism as
that significant politically or
philosophically until until relatively
late you know and I was involved in
ecology and real world politics in
different ways before that - again
people in on my channel know I did get
directly involved in ecology and
lobbying for change at City Hall at
government level and that sort of thing
anyway out of the ashes of my engagement
with Buddhism I tried various other
things including that I tried to get
involved with humanitarian work the
political activism and active research
with Korea in a jib way which is one of
the reasons why my list the languages of
studied is so long so I study quite a
list of Asian languages and I started
working on languages in digitus North
America so throughout this you can say
I've been simultaneously engaged with
research and humanitarian work there's
have been kind of the guiding principles
my life and all of it at the same time
being frankly quite philosophical for
betterment and now you know as I say
veganism is kind of my main my main
identity in part because so many of
these other things I worked on and
didn't failure so it's really easy for
me to imagine a parallel universe where
the main thing I was working on was
indigenous languages in politics and I
just happened to be vegan or the main
thing I was working on was politics and
human rights in Cambodia Laos and
Thailand or even Buddhist manuscript and
historical research and I'm vegan
where that's you know that's one of
things but as those other things as
those other you know features in the
landscape collapsed veganism become the
main thing I'm known for giving morality
lectures on a life a lifetime rich in
morality like let's actually talk about
these foundations pretty much all of
your ideology so look was just some
people gonna see this who don't know you
so I've said a lot about myself could I
just ask you one of the
mentioned about you is that you describe
yourself mostly in terms of philosophy
but you say a lot of things you want to
open this video our politics can you
talk a little bit about your own you
engage with philosophy and what you know
why you wear that hat or what it means
to you okay so basically I got into a
neutral philosophy is that mind or your
end I don't hear anything wrong sounds
fun to me I'm sorry there was an echo
just for a second okay so basically I'm
introduced to philosophy through a guy
named art Dawkins quite a while ago
perhaps 2016 although before that I
handle and usually was called easy
philosophy
I had a few Inklings as to what
philosophy was through the ancient
Greeks but I never read any of the stuff
so I literally had no idea what I was
talking about in other words I was a
sophist but I had to learn the hard way
and I think that's what got me most
interested into the subject so because I
would classify myself as an atheist I'll
be very staunch about my beliefs and I
would actually try to express them
online and because I listened to a lot
of Christopher Hitchens back in the day
I thought I was some genius debater so I
got myself involved in a lot of dissent
a lot of arguments with random people um
who would be be open to discussing it
and my attempts at deflecting their
arguments would prove to be very in
efficacy if you will so over time I got
involved in more debate with more people
and I realized that wow I'm not some
genius debater I'm just some kid who has
no idea what he's talking about so and I
learned that lesson through talking to a
few people I learned a lesson through
talking to a guy named Darth Dawkins
back in 2016 and my clash with the
drunken peasants fanbase Oh No kidding
huh yes they lambasted the hell out of
me back in 2016 but that's because I
acted like a complete [ __ ]
I made substantiate arguments to them I
learned my lesson swiftly and soundly to
say the least
so that was my first introduction to
philosophy but what got me interested in
philosophy itself was my introduction to
a guy named Jack on strike now he is the
owner of a discord server could debate
Colosseum although he has pretty like
large connections to a lot of people in
the great to make community I Jack I'm
strike another guy made
McCrea ottoman deus ramses ii a few
people in the skeptic community that are
probably more base-level who like to
discuss things with people who are like
flat-earthers or presuppositionalist
and that segues us onto the subject of a
of darth Dawkins because I had a debate
with him and I remember he completely
flabbergasted me so he told me to look
into one thing she said the three laws
of lodging like I don't know there's
laws of logic of laws just intuitional
so I looked into them and as my first
introduction and then a sudden student
honestly understand the types of
conversations these other people like
Ozymandias ramses ii what they were
talking about because before it will
just go well over my head I thought I'd
get the gist but then I get really bored
so I was like I don't actually
understand this stuff so I started
looking into it and then I've got my
first wave of books that I bought yeah
great philosophical methodology theory
of knowledge a meta epistemology and
skepticism so that's I'd say probably
three favorite books in this part but
I've got stacks of others on the Fossey
with language philosophy of logic even
which is actually pretty rare um
the philosophy of mathematics is the
fostering of science and then on to
phenomenology flosses mind onto ethics
if your philosophy of art philosophy or
political philosophy philosophy of
social science philosophy of psychology
and critical theory and decision theory
so these very very interesting subjects
and I'm I skim through all these books
but I make sure that they're really like
sequentially ordered so that way when I
read one book the next book I read will
be well grounded on the previous book so
while I'm reading right now has been
quite um inefficient to meta philosophy
so I'm just rereading it because I've
read it like three times so far so I was
trying to get a better understanding of
it so I can also like make a video on it
so reading all this stuff I've got a
much better idea of the general scope of
philosophy and um and with that I've
happened to be able to understand a lot
more important stuff over time coming
from the mouths of other individuals I
think that's actually really important
you should start off by listening to
personalities you need to start off with
the fundamental stuff
and then with a critical skirt listen to
the personalities so that's my
introduction to philosophy as the boys
you can put applause on the same story
motivated because you've been through
this process of yeah yeah but I just
mentioned one of the difference you mean
you in terms of my my approach to
philosophy I mean you mentioned boredom
and boredom is a real factor I mean like
I'm not gonna simply leave no well how
can you this is such a great book and
even warned but you know partly to avoid
boredom probably cause of what I did
what I thought was real what was fake my
approach was really based on primary
sources because I found the secondary
sources very insincere so like you know
if I want to know Aristotle I'd go and
read Aristotle directly nowadays a lot
of people will give you warnings about
that like well you know so when I was 19
or younger even reading this stuff you
know I brought different kinds of
distorting biases and expectations to
reading it and I'm cursed with a very
good memory this is a blessing in a
curse but I know I'm now reading this
book and I think the last time I read it
that was nineteen years old and I can
remember how differently I responded to
the same pastors of texts as a 19 year
old and I'm now 39 it's weird
experience but yeah you know I have a
series of videos that's still ongoing
that are on my channel and they're also
my girlfriend Melissa's channel where we
are really reading a lot of the
foundations of European philosophy
Socrates Plato Aristotle Thucydides
Xenophon it's not it's not that long
list and it's a list I've put together
for my girlfriend and you know I just
say so those videos will not you know
you may enjoy watching those videos and
they may or may not interest you enough
to read some of those some of those
ancient sources in in the the primary
source um but it was an interesting
challenge for me because I mean when I
met my girlfriend she basically you know
expressed her her jealousy she was like
look you have this background you have
this education that you gave yourself
she was aware isn't summit learned in
the classroom and you said what you know
what is it she should she should learn
from it and the other thing is because
she's with me at this stage of my life I
really said to her look the most
important stuff is ancient Athens it's
really knowing what happened
ancient Athens into this pretty short
period of history in ancient Athens -
its kind of one century
that's this especially important century
in Athens and when I was younger again I
mentioned the sense of disappointment
with Western philosophy that's I
wouldn't nurse with that I mean you come
out of an atheist background and I don't
just mean that you're atheist but that
you're engaged with ideas and debates
and atheism um one of the most
disappointing things about European
philosophy is the extent to which almost
all of it is directly or indirectly
about God about these kinds of so to
give it to give example what Kant
Immanuel Kant says about epistemology
all of it all of it is indirectly about
faith in in God you know and and it's
really funny because I've recently
talked to a couple people I just
mentioned in passing in a video and I
got email from people saying no no no
you misunderstood concertina I was lying
no it's but the extent to which someone
like he really is setting the groundwork
for um for an argument for the existence
of God so you know of course there are a
few atheist philosophers but you know
when I was a young man so give two
example I was I was pissed off with
Aristotle at 19 because he doesn't deal
with slavery or he doesn't deal with
slavery the way I want him to deal with
slavery and it's like how can i how can
I take seriously a philosopher or it's
all you with democracy and equality as
the old slavery but likewise a lot of
that the classics of European philosophy
um just so much of it was about the
Christian monotheistic project that I
got pissed out of it so you say if if my
girlfriend had met me when I was her age
she's now 25 I probably had a totally
different approach and I wouldn't have
seen the the ancient Greek works as
being as valuable I would have been more
in my kind of anti Eurocentric period of
I don't know I don't know some something
from ancient Buddhism would be on the
reading list or something yeah yeah yeah
but as it is now it now that I've now
that I've grown a long beard now that
I'm a middle-aged man I do see the
unique significance of those sources
from from Athens in a very different
light yeah but you know that's based on
knowledge not on ignorance so I can say
that over time in your history um
has a fluctuated between thinking that
perhaps the the Greeks were the most
important philosophers with their ideas
and all perhaps was it like was there a
time where he ever thought that the
Germans perhaps had the best ideas um
well the the one okay they're really
only a couple of Germans that I that I
really relate to positively and they're
very dissident voices so we're really
talking about Arthur Schopenhauer and
Max Turner and a few other kind of
radical unpredictable figures who were
not accepted in the mainstream I mean
you know I regard Friedrich Nietzsche's
as garbage I regard him basically our
basically regard him as being like a
newspaper column that's not a real
philosopher he says a lot of stuff just
to get attention um you know so I just
don't I don't think you should be taken
seriously as a philosopher and you know
somebody like Hegel GWF Hegel you know
whose significance has been massively
exaggerated for many reasons including
his his alleged influence on Karl Marx
and thus Marxism and this communism um
you know to me again this is this is
really garbage so no and again some of
these other issues are there the
preoccupation with you know Christianity
and monotheism the themes that are being
dealt with and you sir just one of the
things say um what is philosophy my
perspective is actually that philosophy
is a problem-solving method or plural
it's a bunch of problem solving methods
and then discussions we have about
problem solving methods and you know so
this is someone says to you that they
consider Sigmund Freud or Carl Jung a
great philosopher in a sense Sigmund
Freud is a philosopher um but I think
it's worth asking the question well what
are the problems that he solved or what
are the problem-solving methods he
introduced to philosophy and you know I
don't think Sigmund Freud you know found
a cure for anorexia I'm sorry this is a
maybe a gross example but I think you
know if the point was that this type of
neurosis that would be Freud's term can
be solved through philosophical
conversations which is his belief his
belief wasn't the talking cure in some
way like a Socratic notion you sit down
have these
peculiar conversations and solve your
your neuroses your mental problems your
mental and sexual problems you know I
think it's worth saying well he didn't
solve the problems he actually failed
now again sorry this isn't saying the
work of Sigmund Freud is have absolutely
zero value I think actually it's an
interesting philosophical question can
any book over 200 pages be of absolutely
zero but but you know this this this
question in this sense I have something
in common with Karl Popper who's a
philosopher of science which is III do
think fundamentally philosophy is not
like poetry or literature you know the
value of poetry is not going to be
problem-solving but yeah when it when I
say so dismissively well I don't think
Nietzsche is worth anything I don't
think he goes with anything one my bias
is I'm looking at philosophy as a
problem-solving method and then -
there's the selection of which problems
you're trying to solve
so again just because I have it on table
as the example Aristotle tries to solve
some problems with democracy but slavery
is not one of them he just doesn't
problem but you know all right that's
interesting so you know and so on many
many philosophers in that sense are
deeply flawed but just to mention I mean
someone like Schopenhauer at least he's
an atheist and at his time he felt
censor he couldn't express himself
terribly directly as as an atheist and
he's really a dissident voice in that
era so for me Schopenhauer was part of
my appreciation for for Buddhist
philosophy where I started seeing
European philosophy as just one voice
you know and you know as you say kind of
the falling apart of the Eurocentric
myth that progress and new ideas was
something happen everywhere and was not
you know not uniquely Western European
which I'm you know I mean I guess I'm
glad I climbed up that tree you know saw
the view from over there to some extent
but sure having been up the tree again a
question of which problems yourself you
will not find the basis for democracy in
the Buddhist Canon or Buddhist
philosophy and that's again which
problems you know solve that's a problem
I'm really into
and I'm really interested in how do we
have a democratic society now in the
future so yeah from that perspective
yeah the legacy of ancient Athens and
one special century in ancient Athens is
it's really tremendously important yeah
absolutely would you say it would be the
most important concepts that have come
from the Greeks that have contributed
philosophical discussions even to this
day well um well you know so so I'm a
nihilist so I'm I'm you know biased in
the sense when you compare the ancient
Greeks to what follows after in the Dark
Ages
what's so productive is the culture of
doubt the culture of doubt and
self-doubt and cross-examination
everyone and everything is being
questioned and Socrates to some extent
exemplifies this but whether you're
looking at Socrates or you know two
generations later with with Aristotle um
the question of what is good and what is
bad and what is justice and even what is
democracy and you know what is the
afterlife
it may seem pedantic that you sit down
in one one Greek after another they'll
start all these discussions by defining
the terms
good practice anyway but yeah come on do
you do you really need to define what is
democracy at the start of this passage
or whatever and the answer is yes you
really do because this was a time in a
culture where those things there there
was there was not just debate there was
real doubt yeah and you know in a lot of
ways the essence of Christianity is of
trying to get people to live with no
sense of death no no you know this part
of the mentality of faith and
Christendom is things that raise doubt
don't even think about them you know
shut that out of your mind don't let you
know that this idea that that's the
devil you know whispering in your ear or
something
no no unthinkable unthinkable you kind
of partition your your your mode of
thinking and the Greeks you by contrast
live in this constant state of doubt and
cross-examination including you know the
court system including everyone being
dragged in and put on trial and possibly
flogged or fined or be
and including it's not really my bag but
in terms of the progress of science you
know the fact that there was an open
debate which was based ultimately on on
arithmetic you know observations of the
movement of the planets about whether
the Sun was geocentric or heliocentric
whether the earth rose around the Sun or
the Sun revolved around the earth and
this debate was not possible a couple of
centuries later and in Christian Europe
and by the way the heliocentric model
lost the arguments in support of the
earth at the center they actually won so
the fact that you could have the debate
and you can have the evidence presented
doesn't mean you mean Socrates was
executed it doesn't mean doesn't the
fact thing of a trial doesn't mean that
the you know innocent people are founded
as innocent but yeah that's um so to me
I'm kind of answer in terms of it under
an underlying value but you know if you
wanted to write to answer your question
obviously I mean you know that the big
ones are you know democracy equality
justice you know those those social and
political concepts yeah I have to say
those those are the absolutely the most
fundamental and you know beyond that
it's today people use the term cultural
relativism in a negative sense it's true
that people like Aristotle and even more
so people like Herodotus they did
examine their own culture and its values
and assumptions in contrast to other
fundamentally different cultures yeah
and give a simple example you know um a
lot of people notes infamous that Athens
was quite tolerant towards what we now
consider pedophilia or pederasty yeah
but the end of the cultures right next
door where those were serious crimes and
they were aware of that Condors they had
other cultures where the idea of
marriage was totally different more
ideas about morality and so much other
different and so that also was brought
about a type of lively doubt where do
our cultural values and assumptions come
from and the answer was not from God you
know the answer was a more sophisticated
examination of law and cultural
convention and even legend and myth and
what have you so yeah for me this is the
thing as a nihilist
I think doubt is something we have to
learn to value positively you know in
our own cognition in another level in
our societies and so on okay so like we
were
gods to say for instance discussion
waiting out what tends to be like the
minorities opinion wouldn't that point
out and/or illustrate a issue to be
found within democracies very essence I
say for instance even a quite democracy
to be type of a bill to popularity or
perhaps my equals right what's your take
on that but well okay democracy in the
ancient Athenian sense is ruled by the
demos and it's it's ruled by the poorest
so this is one of my personal bugbears
or enthusiasm so Menino it's true we
have this fear of the majority beating
up on the minority but you know in each
of the social classes represents their
own interest and so on but having the
poor in government I can't even say in
Parliament directly making decisions in
government I think does very
fundamentally change things so you know
in terms of what is the function of
government and what are the what are the
what are the conflicts that arise you
know most of our countries are
struggling with a fundamental
indifference of the government towards
the poor as opposed to the government
being preoccupied with you know
providing social services to exactly the
people who need the social services the
rich really do not require that the
trains run on time it's really the poor
for whom the trains matter
um crucially so you know it's nice if
the trains are good enough that the rich
can enjoy them that's another thing this
is this is a fundamental shift in terms
of what is what is government what is
democracy now I think what needs to be
pointed out here is that Athens did not
deal with anything like the situation of
Canada committing genocide and having an
indigenous ethnic minority who are in
that sense you know we're really
oppressed and second-class citizens yeah
um and it's a question could they have I
mean you know Athens was um you know of
course it was just one city but also
they never extended any democratic
rights any foreigners in fact even if
you had one parent who was
foreign it's just your mother does your
father was won't you never participate
democratically and so on so I mean I
think there's a there's a difference to
be observed here between one point on
the map and you know a Dominion
that's what Canada is referred to as you
know the the Dominion of Canada and when
it's a Dominion that was extended over
you know a foreign enemy people who
didn't ask to be conquered and who then
become you know an oppressed minority
within it so but if if we're comparing
something to the alternative so you know
I do not regard Parliament as as
democratic I regard what we have in
Canada as kind of a system of oligarchy
and you know this is one of the
questions but if if you had democracy
direct democracy in the Athenian sense
then in theory the native people would
have been in that demos that would have
been well in the Athens is called the
boule wasn't called though wasn't called
the Parliament they would have been in
government from the earliest period
including the period when they were the
majority so it's impossible to imagine
how the evolution of that culture would
have been different if you had democracy
but obviously I think the result would
have been a hybrid culture like I don't
really think there's a parallel universe
in which our native people remained
completely untouched by you know the
technology culture and customs of Europe
but if they really were just physically
in the halls of power speaking their own
language and involves and so on it it's
unimaginable and so sorry I know I'm
where the other person I'm talking to is
in Australia but the situation we were
in now is that we have a parliamentary
tradition certain criminal I know I
think this is true of us truly - you
guys don't even have seats in parliament
reserved for indigenous people or
anything like that - it's not the case
I'm not sure about that but they may be
pushing towards that I hear it's very
progressive around that around those
areas especially like um but to me it
sounds more like it's just virtually
signalling in order to quell the the
animosity that not a lot of progressives
have with a lot of the politicians but
for the most part it sounds like they
retained their level of the degree of I
guess tribalistic conservatism
however like they are still at least
making that movements towards that type
of progressive kind of Audiology yeah
what do we well if the question is
basically how would how would democracy
deal with you know while pressing the
minority I mean you know the death of
Socrates himself is in some ways a you
know a warning about this and I think
that's why a lot of people in Athens
lost lost faith in democracy um you know
democracies are capable of being
tyrannical that they're capable of I
mean Socrates was executed for heresy
they're capable of engaging in witch
witch trials and witch hunts and and all
those terrible things but sorry I mean
it's kind of one one thing leading onto
another I mean I think the the
conclusion of that when you see the
danger of democracy the danger towards
minorities the danger of starting Wars
the danger just making bad decisions is
that as soon as you have any real
democracy suddenly you have this
tremendous incentive to care about
public education you know wow I can be
put on trial just like Aristotle or
these people the mob that surround me
they can make a decision to go to war or
dump sewage in the ocean they can make
bad decisions at any time that are going
to be terrible for me so I have to you
know I have to when we have to work as
hard as possible to raise the the
quality of education and level of
discourse so that we don't go back to
you know witch trials that's our cages
or what have you and and the elitism
built into other forms of government
really I think leads to indifference
towards toward so attrition and you know
even even atheism is an example of this
where I think you know elites you have
the attitude of oh well those people can
still believe in in traditional
Christianity you know as if those people
don't matter you know well you know
aren't anyway I mean to me that's a
sickeningly elitist attitude but the the
belief that Christianity should continue
is the opiate for the masses this shows
that you know that the masses do not
have a share of governing or government
power I think it sorry I just say I
think it is tremendously meaningful to
reach out to and really try to change
you know life for quote-unquote those
people the you know worthless sorry and
you do see this I mean the bizarre
outbursts from the far right wing lately
who are by no means the only the
only the only Christians shows the
extent to which those sectors of society
having deep in neglected and I guess
I've reverted to some medieval attitudes
yeah that's that's definitely tribalism
I would say but let's actually shift
gears a little bit whatever you want to
nihilism but we'll do that through the
vehicle of first discussing what beliefs
ought to be held to maximize your
effectiveness as a political vector like
what kind of approach is what virtues do
you need to be holding in order to most
accurately and functionally approach
politics economics and anything around
the social sciences right but so you
phrase the question terms of belief to
mean you asked what do you need to
believe to truncate in both his boon for
the most charitable 'ti because there
are some beliefs that pigeonhole you in
to dogmatism definitely remand other
forms of like fallacious mindsets so
what would you say would be the best
sets of beliefs at least from your
experience right yeah so my opinion is
that the the best the best type of
beliefs the cultivators is none at all
now some people might find that you know
unattainable but I think it's possible
to live with knowing self-doubt so you
know um okay so you know to give an
example you get people involved in
humanitarian work and you might think
it's useful for them to say I believe in
this cause I believe that what we're
doing is uplifting the poor so let's say
I'll give an example um you have a group
of people from France and they've raised
money in France they have government
money and maybe some charity money also
and they're going to a village and Laos
and they say okay we're gonna lift this
village you know out of poverty now it
might seem self-evident especially for
someone who's grown up with a dogmatic
systems belief that the best that you
can do is have everyone motivated like a
sports team saying we're gonna win with
a belief that what they're doing is is
right is right and good and it's gonna
achieve its aims but actually
procedurally cognitively ethically and
even pragmatically
what you want is the exact opposite is
you want people to be really skeptic
and with self-doubt examining each of
the decisions you make yes at every step
and asking exactly those questions is is
it right what we're doing is this gonna
work why do we assume this is this is
gonna work so project I'm thinking of
this was published
although the author was anonymous
because he was an insider on the project
they said they were gonna let these
people out of poverty and improve their
agriculture and one of their big
projects is that were gonna fill the
build a bridge to connect this community
to another community and this specific
project this was in northern Laos was
such a disaster with all this French
government money that at the end the
villagers had literally abandoned the
village so that the population of the
village was reduced to zero so as a
humanitarian project goes that's about
the greatest disaster you can have the
time the recipients the of the donations
ran away rather than continuing to
receive your charity and notice this is
this is kind of the slippery slope of
faith is a great example this is totally
secular they weren't a religious charity
by the way think they were government
supported secular charity so they
decided we need to build this bridge and
there's you know a little road leading
up the bridge obviously how are we gonna
do it well they're gonna force the local
peasants to build this bridge well they
don't want to and you're paying less
than the the local minimum wage they
weren't paying nothing but they were
paying almost nothing much less than the
local informal minimum wage let alone
the legal animam wage in that country
and say well we'll get the military to
round them up and and force them to work
if you if you believe in the project I
mean you see oh this is of course with
the religious mentality knows if you
believe in the project you'll you'll do
it right mmm what if you're examining it
at every stage and it's like well wait a
minute what is it we're really trying to
accomplish here now how are we coming
how did we come to this decision and
what are the opens and what are we gonna
do if you know a B and C I think it's
possible to be you know to it exactly
lack those beliefs that people assume is
at the center of politics and
you know effective advocacy effective
intervention effective humanitarian work
and I think it makes you a much more
more powerful devastating person in that
field because when those issues comes
out I'll give you one more example so I
mean I'm choosing to use real-world
examples I directly experience when I
was in Laos it's oh this is bizarre this
all taxpayers money so that was a French
taxpayers money project that utterly
failed oh there's another one
paid for by the German tax payers the
German taxpayers were paying to plant
more rubber crops in Laos rubber rubber
plantations that's a very strange form
of charity because that sounds like a
for-profit business but again you have
to believe that this is up look
uplifting the poor this is gonna end
poverty or have some kind of positive so
show comes now I exactly don't believe
that so I did a whole bunch of research
on this well it was there which again
just reflects my character I mean for me
this is also philosophical in a way and
by complete luck I was at the airport
tiny tiny airport in Laos trying to go
up to do humanitarian work in the far
north and the director of that project
from the German government was there and
I asked him questions of a sceptical
kind of just knees one for brevity but I
said to him you know when you look at
the history of of rubber prices I know
you're committing to this project you
know as humanitarian cause but the price
of rubber you know it goes up and down
all the time like I've seen significant
you know crashing this don't you think
you're kind of setting up these these
poor people you're helping to you know
kind of be undone the next time there's
that there's a crash in the road of
course and I remember he laughed he
really laughed he laughed in my face and
he said no no in China the demand for
rubber is infinite he believed in the
project okay so if you don't need to be
an expert in economics to know even I'm
sorry the demand for cocaine is not
infinite the price of cocaine goes up
and down and there's a lot of demand for
cocaine then there is then there is
rubber the and what he was saying was
untrue in another technical sense but
even you really need to be a nihilist
you need to be living with constant
skepticism and self-doubt to pick up on
this kind of thing yes proper
or is one word and you know see people
don't think they have faith in a work
rubber isn't a word like Jesus or
something but it's still an abstraction
what do you mean by rubber the type of
rubber they produce in northern Laos is
actually not the same as the type of
rubber that's produced in Malaysia and
when the rubber from Laos arrives in
China its value is lower than garbage
recycled from the United States of
America garbage rubber is of a higher
grade than the lotion rubber and they
were doing these financial projections
on the basis of infinite demand for the
Malaysian quality of rubber arriving
from both from Malaysia not this or must
that's absurd
and people's lives are being destroyed
I'm sorry look I'm involved in this you
know people sorry a lot of leftovers
will give you [ __ ] oh you have a white
Savior complex on stuff look um I'm
white I identify as white so if you want
to consider me Jewish and not white for
that reason fine but you know I've got
to tell you you can't assume that the
government of Laos has people who can
read English at my level and scrutinize
a report and go through the footnotes
and figure out what's wrong with it I
have a real role as an intellectual and
indirectly this has impacts on thousands
of people's and the lives it's having
impacts on our the poorest of the poor
above all else the rich are gonna be
okay either way whether or not the
rubber plantation works out whether or
not that building a bridge project works
works out and so on so look I say it's a
totally good answer you you sir it's
totally a question you you presented me
with the question was in effect is there
something you should believe you know as
a means to an end in terms of engaged in
politics but you know my answer is is
the opposite I think the discipline is
living with that you know that razor's
edge of shore of doubt and self-doubt
all the time how do I know what I think
I know and you you become sharper in
that process and sir and the only thing
was going to say is all those examples I
had to be able to raise that issue in
that moment you know I happen to meet
this guy at the airport it's because I
live with this philosophy that I'm able
to do that I don't I don't actually
think there's an objective sense in
which I'm a genius but living the way I
do and reading the way I do know I mean
it's not like I have a
memory or something but when I met those
people I'd have all this stuff on hand
and the fact that I don't believe in the
project you know I don't I don't even
believe in what's the definition of
rubber you know I'm sorry
they sound ridiculous you know the fact
that I'm questioning and doubting this
stuff all the time it it leads to that
kind of sharpness that you get to use
when you happen to be in the meeting
with the representative from the
European Union when you happen to be at
the airport and you know whether it's a
formal or informal um that you can use
that in a democratic setting to make
your case or ask the right questions or
raise doubts about what's going on yeah
that's that's my sincere answer that
question
definitely so like um this can actually
take us on through the subject of the
education system itself now because I'm
going to be going to come into
psychology this very much interest to me
because because I want to reconstruct
the education system I think honestly
that we need to say incorporating
mandatory philosophical philosophical
types of classes that perhaps specialize
in logics Oh critical thinking itself
anything that can actually sharpen the
mindset of people because honestly if we
if we keep cultivating this this type of
personality all its going to do is lead
to the downfall of downtrodden groups
and also downfall of like our economic
robustness because if we keep having
like people in power who run on their
own system of faith that's of course not
going to be reaching of the conclusions
that they're intending to because
they're going to be ignoring certain
variables that may contradict what
they're running off which will lead to
these thoughts conclusion they attend so
what do you think would be the best
types of classes we should implement in
order to reconstruct how our people
think well okay so again my answer is a
lot of dealt a lot of doubt so encoded
at every level um I have looked at
studies of attempts to incorporate
critical thinking into the curriculum
and I gather I think they were at the
high school level to get critical
thinking it's possible they were at the
college level and I'm I'm misremembering
that article but they weren't small
small children what have you and they
set up formal criteria for what is
critical thinking so they had a test you
know like an IQ test or you know
this kind of test where they would test
you for how much critical thinking you
had and they did baseline midline ed
line testing so it's a to see before you
got this education how good were you a
critical thinking during and after so
you you you saw the impact of the course
now step one there is already
tremendously difficult and important so
again so I already said how do you
define rubber where are you to find
demography how do you define critical
thinking so obviously there was a huge
leap here in actually defining critical
thinking is something you can measure if
you can measure it it exists um and what
they found was that the education
offered actually lowered the students
ability to do critical thinking yeah so
this is this is a really interesting
puzzle and it raises the questions of
authority in education and what is
education and so on
so I've done a lot of reading and
talking about loss of education within
the last year year and a half yes well a
lot of it's not on YouTube Broca's my
job in China so I was giving lectures on
philosophy of education in China to
Chinese students just very interesting
also this is completely non democratic
dictatorial society and I was talking
about Plato and Aristotle and philosophy
of Education and the West ISM and
relatively new ideas like Montessori
education Montessori is new compared to
Plato but this is not that new you know
but what I point out of the students was
of all the so we went over the whole
philosophy of education as history of
philosophy education ancient to modern
as much as I could put into the course
and when we got to Montessori I point
out of them this is different from every
other Floss of Education this is the one
system of Education where we can prove
as a scientific fact it makes people
smarter I don't know any other yes I
don't know any other system of Education
the clip yes and we've done double-blind
testing and all that stuff
yeah I'm sorry I mean double-blind might
not be quite the actor term but there
was a study in Texas where they took the
crucial step of assigning the students
at random so it wasn't the parents
choice whether or not kids wanted to
Montessori
earlier studies as you imagine that
showed that smarter
kids were coming in Montessori you can
say oh but maybe it's just because the
parents are smarter or something's kind
no even when it was a randomized
government controlled trial and people
were randomly assigned to these things
so there was no role of wealth or social
class Montessori actually produces
smarter people and it's a measurable
difference and scientifically when
you're going through the data looking
for what the difference is this is my
opinion but it is also based pretty
directly I would say there was one
factor that is outstanding and is not
debatable boredom yes sorry is less
boring right engagement is absolutely
crucial
all right well and every other system of
education of kids at war I mean to look
if I want to teach Aristotle and people
say it's boring this is actually the
sexual fundamental problem so yeah look
I point this out to say I've made kind
of two points quickly one we can have
so-called improvements of education you
know where people say they're teaching
critical thinking but what are they
actually teaching what are the actual
outcomes the not the improvements and
then to you can absolutely want the
Montessori system which was developed
for totally different reasons it was
actually developed to help mentally
disabled children and children of poor
factory workers in Italy or
disadvantaged and socially marginalized
it wasn't it created to create a
hyper-intelligent a lead of wealthy
people in California but that's what
it's doing it's only the richest of the
rich now who get access to the
Montessori education with a few
interesting exceptions there are some
schools for the four that I want as
education but but I don't think but I
just mentioned I don't think want to
sori cleans to teach critical thinking
yeah
but it but it evidently does all that
leave kids get get more to the education
so this is this is again the kind of
thing you have to be the open to well
for some reason this type of education
works better and then I'll throw in a
quote from the Dune books I have not
read the dune books that's it's a
science fiction series but there's a
quote in there that says men mankind
gave over a lot of their thinking to
machines ie to computers they let
computers assist them in there and
information because they they imagine
that that by doing so you know the
machines would set them free would free
them of the burden of their their labors
what in fact um this only made them into
slaves because the machines themselves
were simply controlled by other men at
other more powerful machines you know
kind of terrifying
you know reflection on on the role of
computer technology okay if you have a
problem today that University education
or high school education is
authoritarian and fails to teach
critical thinking the fundamental
problem is if we take this same format
and then put the name of critical
thinking on top it's like what the
Communists did communists put new you
know headlines on education this is
going to teach freedom and equality and
all these wonderful ideologies are
stamped on to it how much did education
really change in communist China or
communist Russia or remain horrible
authoritarian and not teaching critical
thinking and and so on and oppressive in
in various ways um yes or obviously I'm
not gonna ridicule Western education
today as being quite the same as that
but you know whether or not it's
possible by invoking the name of
critical thinking to actually teach
critical thinking this I'm extremely
skeptical about and conversely maybe
something like the Montessori method
maybe we've actually struck on part of
part of the solution of the problem yeah
so I think engagement might actually
eliminate the need to teach critical
thinking directly perhaps through
engagement these students can learn
intuition aliy the critical thought and
logic behind the subjects that are being
taught so perhaps that would actually
unlock massive massive problems so what
exactly does Montessori teach like do
you know they're actual subjects yeah
sure I do um
so thankfully Montessori is not based on
the mission one unrelated but parallel
thought Montessori is is based on a
rejection of the lecture format so I
myself I lecture on YouTube and I was in
China I had the fun I was a university
professor I got to stand at a podium and
theatrically lecture so I'm you know if
anything I'm positive
biased about lecturing because I'm I'm
good at it yeah teacher in Montessori
will stand silently and the students
will sit on mats in a circle but each
student is separate and they sit on a
mat and they have their workbook and the
they have a lot of emphasis on tactile
learning implements so the book is going
to explain the lesson let's say the
lessons about grammar and then there
probably have little pieces of wood with
verb adjective noun and the sentence and
they'll read this book and they'll use
the pieces of wood and move them around
and then figure if they got it right or
got it wrong and if they don't
understand what they're doing they'll
put their hand up and ask the teacher to
come and explain okay I think I've got
this figured out but what am I supposed
to do with the adjectives and that's how
it works so in a sense I mean
it's closer to a video game than a
university lecture you can imagine but
it's not there's no video component but
what you're doing and learning alone but
together with the other with the other
students you can imagine your lunch
break you might talk to the students of
what you did but it's not it's not this
back and forth format now I just
contrast this thing else you know so
whether it's university or high school I
think this is true of most primary
school also in Western education you
write an essay you hand it in you get a
grade back and maybe you get some red
circles or whatever I don't think I ever
once had a teacher sit down with me and
discuss the essay the way I would as an
editor I've worked as a professional
editor of of nonfiction and if you think
about critical thinking and again this
would be a lot of hours if I'm a teacher
and I have 40 students that maybe 40
hours of seven maybe even if it's thirty
minutes each you know and the student
has to be willing to you have to have a
culture again this is a non
authoritarian thing if I'm standing at
the classroom I can just dictate to you
if I'm just lecturing but to actually
sit down with you and say okay well what
you're doing here I understand you got
this Wikipedia article and you found
this but what you didn't consider was
and to talk that through with someone
that way now you know look is that
teaching critical thinking from my
perspective I think yes I think I click
just if you personally wrote an essay
Darren and you you showed it to me
and you know I went through with you
that way I think there's a sense in
which I am teaching critical thinking on
whatever the specific issue is like okay
what you don't realize is implicitly you
know this is saying this or whatever
whatever the issues are about sources or
how you use them and Minoso this is so
this is this is just one example and it
may be a unique example but the role of
editor is is very different from the
role of lecturer and it's very different
the role of grading a paper - and I
think a very small minority of students
have that relationship with their
parents where their parents may play
that role and talk you through with them
but definitely not a teacher it's not
part of the education process and we
think about it that's more valuable than
writing the paper would be because sorry
this is a quotation I use all the time I
only remember who I'm quoting maybe I'm
invented it but I don't think I did we
do not learn from making mistakes but
from noticing them yeah if I can write
an essay that's full of these errors but
if I have someone point them out to me
and then I go and rate a revision or I
write a better I say or something that
can be a much more meaningful new
process and that's not that's not what
we've got because it's time-consuming so
sorry this is this is a specific example
and it's shallow but it's actually of
horrendously crucial the teachers I've
had throughout my high school years
especially throughout my childhood years
they most most of the time they would
just point out that I had an error here
and there but they would never actually
go in yet why they're pointing out the
error would happen era was conflicting
with like say Frances methodologically
and now just told me to follow thee be
strict methods they won't even tell me
the methodology you know just tell me
the methods and that's the thing that
doesn't real thinking it doesn't teach
you how to understand the nature of what
you're doing in learning and in practice
so that's a very big issue in the
current education system or least the
education system I want to maybe
audience has individually different
experiences with their education system
that's this was better but my my
experience was horrendous it was
terrible I feel yeah
we we have this in common but I
mentioned so I got to apply my own
philosophy of Education in this sense in
how I learned Chinese so I do manage the
Chinese is a very very hard language to
learn but you so if you do the normal
method you will never learn Chinese
because even if I if I just circle
what's wrong and hand it back to you you
will never be able to figure out what
you're doing wrong that there's no the
gap between languages is broad enough I
think this is true with more
content-based things too it's like well
okay there was something wrong with how
I'm using the source but I'm not
actually gonna develop a sophisticated
perspective on it by just being told I
get a get a c-minus but you know um what
I would do every day when I took this
this Chinese course I would either be
writing or rewriting an essay and then I
would sit there with the teacher face to
face and we go through and it could take
a whole hour where she's not just circle
she's explained to me what I'm doing
wrong and it's like oh no in Chinese you
don't say it this way because this is
the type of verb where you split it into
two halves and put one at the start of
the sentence and one at the end it's
it's not simple you know it's it's not
as if you know there's there's nothing
easy about understanding and I remember
I had a condo in Surrey and here in
Canada
by contrast the way they they teach
Chinese is they play an audio CD you
know you have more than 40 students in a
classroom they press play on a CD you
have a photocopied handout and you
select multiple choice you know a B and
C so if you do that you'll never get I
know this is simple but it still cuts
deep
you'll never be able to understand why
like the Chinese word for interesting
you say oh this is interesting they have
several different verbs that mean
interesting that you have to use in
different contexts for different types
of things and you know one of my
professors said oh no they don't use the
word interesting this way well if you
don't have the time to sit down and how
are you ever gonna progress from that
you know it's it's really tough but no
the the photocopied tests with the audio
CD playing that's that's a brick wall
for that kind of learn absolutely I
think I think that represents a lot of
the problems with with Western education
sure yeah the teachers seem to be more
focused on who what when where and where
but they never seem to be focused on the
why or how they seem to be focused more
description rather than explanation and
just
occasion an emphasis on justification
because that's what gives you the the
idea and inkling as it's the nature of
what you're actually doing and what
you're trying to achieve I have mixed
feelings about that just because our
education system now is bad and it has
limitations
yeah and within those limitations I
think there is something positive to be
said even for returning to memorization
of brute facts yeah sure in that you
know you can't have a system where you
say look look guys these are the facts
you need to know this is what's gonna be
on the test and you know you're free to
draw your own conclusions maybe we can
even have discussion in class or
something but you know that's so India
we've been talking a lot about China and
Chinese culture but by contrast India
has a really proud tradition going back
3,000 plus years you know they're their
form of law was based on memorization so
the laws of a country every
distinguished gentleman would have
memorized the law I wish we have law
that was that brief today that you could
memorize all the laws of the country you
were you were living and they'd write
them in kind of rhyming couplets and
this kind of thing to make it easier to
memorize so the idea of memorizing and
reciting texts as being fundamental
learning um you know my education was so
terrible we didn't even learn facts you
know we really didn't we really didn't
we really learned was sentimentality and
learned yeah so I mean if you think
about like what is the history of Canada
what was impressed upon us were
sentiments about openness and fairness
and about being better than the
Americans and being better than the
Spanish and the brotherhood between the
English and the French who used to hate
each other but we don't need more and it
would not being racist it was really all
about sentimentality and
you know if you asked any of the
students at the end of the education
when did Napoleon die they can't tell
you and you know it does matter
you know you need to know when and where
Napoleon died why did Napoleon matter so
much for the history of Canada and you
know we we didn't learn that either you
know so what what did what was the
points position on slavery
so look it's a bad system how to move
forward you know I'm not sure that I
would I would embrace moving away from
from the teaching of raw facts just
given what we've got to work with right
now it could be that in some ways the
teachers role could be improved by
liberating them from some of the
[ __ ] they're expected to do and say
okay maybe you can have a more limited
role of teaching facts especially if
we're gonna continue having 40 and 50
students in a classroom is there needs
to be some level of triangulation there
needs to be a incorporation between
theoretical and practical if also that
if you've got me like example
Psychopaths corroborate my idea or
perhaps go against it so look it's all
about budget I mean you know this is the
problem and watch what you're saying I
mean you know so a lot of people
especially left wingers have wanted to
get kids out of the classroom and put
them on the farm and you know give them
experience of actually applying science
in those kinds of contacts the vegan
film director who made Titanic James
Cameron yeah he has a very tiny school
that's all vegan the food's all vegan
there that's based on that principle
where the kids get out and learn how to
how to build a solar panel and how to
plant plant trees but you know so I mean
I sympathized the impulse to a limited
extent I recently went recently a couple
years ago heard a very passionate
argument for trying to include computer
programming in school education and they
made all these arguments for it but I'm
actually I do have mixed feelings about
that kind of thing where you're teaching
practical and hands-on things to to
youth I mean you know it's very easy for
me to justify teaching Aristotle and the
theory of democracy together or even I
mean again nobody learns how does City
Hall work how do you take a complaint to
City Hall how do you put a small how do
you go to small claims court how do you
go to court and represent yourself we
don't learn doubt in school there all
kinds of things of that there are
philosophical and political that are not
involved in school at all instead you
learn volleyball you know you know when
you get into something like teaching
computer programming
or teaching how to actually how to
actually work on a farm
I'm divided because you know on the one
hand I can see the the in the abstract
what you're saying is the value of
having having practical experience of
things but on the other hand you're in
effect giving vocational training to
people that's going to be relevant to
the lives of less than 1% of the
students yeah and you say very briefly
you know when light bulbs were
discovered it would be easy to say oh in
the future everyone's gonna be working
in a light bulb factory like light bulbs
are changing the whole world and they
did light bulbs change the whole world
they changed life right now how many
light bulbs are in this room but how
many people do you know who were in the
light bulb industry it's it's a tiny
percentage and it's it's sad but true
how many people do you know who actually
work on a farm it's you can look up the
statistics for any given country it is a
shockingly small percentage we just
deserve a news story I promoted on
patreon we just had 12,000 pigs died
when one farm one factory farm caught
fire and burnt down in Canada so 12,000
pigs the farm had fewer than 1,000
employees yeah and of course you know
it's a 24-hour operation people and you
know some of them were in the office
it's it's viable but it with very very
small numbers of people are employed
even when you got 12,000 pig that's a
lot of pig poo that's a lot that's a lot
of food and a lot of poo and a lot of
blood and a lot of misery so I'm vegan
if the audience doesn't know but anyway
uh yeah so that's all I am of two minds
about that if you talk about having
hands on and then the other the other
reality is ultimately I look at one of
the best systems of Education in the
world's also important to be open to
looking at what's good system education
Japan for childhood education has one of
the best systems education in the world
on a large scale and Japan is going
bankrupt you know um you know that the
government is it's very very seriously
at a state of you know debt to GDP ratio
that's that's facing bankruptcy and
maybe in the future we'll look back on
this period of Japan Japanese education
as a golden age that was lost
I just mentioned they are doing a lot of
things right in some places on education
and again I think the Montessori system
is a great example Montessori is not
cheap you know having one teacher with
eight students is not cheap yeah and you
know but we love we have we have tough
decisions to make you have any
suggestions for books anyone I'm
majority agree Wanaka great on the
subject of philosophy of education Wow
you so that's a great question I do have
a book reviews playlist on my channel
excellent and there were a couple of
those are our floss of Education books
but you know honestly it is the most
neglected area of philosophy I agree
blowing yeah okay if you if you know go
ahead but the funny thing is also
philosophy education there's a lot of
money involved because you know just a
lot of people earn their living as as
teachers so you'd really think there'd
be more just more interest and more
emphasis on that but aside from the
ancient stuff meal reading reading what
Aristotle has to say or Plato is
interesting in its way but it's utterly
irrelevant I mean again there was this
other kind of brief burst of interest in
philosophy of education was you know
shocked or so so jean-jacques rousseau
he's both a figure in the turning the
turning point of Europe's history in
terms of democracy but the major
influence he had in his own lifetime was
actually philosophy of education but
today that's the it's just horseshit I
mean there's no salience sorry same with
no offense to Aristotle Plato but as no
no relevance at all to to education our
times yeah so so I just mentioned
Susanna positive but it's amazing how
poor that the literature is on flawless
education what I wonder I've never found
a book like this
I'm betting someone wrote a book about
the history of education in Scotland and
one of things I really learned in the
last year and a half is the Scotland was
a unique and important place in exactly
this respect that the history of
education in Scotland was different from
England and significantly differ from
any other part of Europe so
transformation in public education and
universal education and so on it really
happened in Scotland not in Italy Italy
was a more advanced country in every
well did not in France what have you it
happened first in Scotland so probably
someone whether it's an academic article
or mainstream book probably there is
some reasonably philosophical reflection
on how this came about in Scotland I
looked at the history as much as I could
while it was in China this last year and
it seems to me one element that's
probably neglected was just the
emergence of one language in Scotland
they started off everyone was speaking
these different isolated languages that
nobody else spoke anywhere in the world
these Scottish languages that you know
were of no use even in England and then
they engage with Latin they tried to
make Latin their unifying language and
then eventually they gave up and made
English the unifying language of
Education but the struggle for universal
education the belief in education and
admissions to my Chinese students also
the Scottish had a culture of shaming
you if you weren't educated of shaming
you if you weren't a member of a book
club it wasn't good enough to be a
farmer or a factory worker or a soldier
that you should be a member of a book
club and should be reading you know
serious nonfiction what everything you
should care what they should say and be
reading and it's quite that Scott
Scottish culture is still quite nasty
that way um you know in America people
won't really tell you you're stupid dear
to your face so it's it the history of
education in Scotland is probably really
worth studying and then you know and
that's over a couple of centuries I
think there's an open question maybe
someone has done a book about education
for example in Switzerland and what's
gone right there but that'll be very
recent that'll be just since World War
two once again what's wrong but yeah I'd
say that's in terms of the philosophical
questions being asked to answer that
might be where you'll find something
worth reading have you read anything
from Oxford that what I say for instance
I come across a book could be Oxford
handbooks for force of Education are you
ready there's lines I have the story
both Oxford and Cambridge in the UK have
made attempts at that but I think it was
actually Cambridge who tried to do a
whole series for specifically political
philosophy and I remember going through
that but what is is this a new serie
maybe you can tell me about it is it
greater is it terrible cuz most you're
not terrible yeah I haven't read it but
I've looked in the title
contents and I've read a little bit of
the introduction this is a while back
because I was I was looking as hard as I
could for good books on the introduction
as an introduction to the fostering of
education but couldn't find anyway I
fell one by Clouseau and I found one
from Oxford none from Cambridge that one
from Plunkett seemed to be to seem to
have more of a political spin on
education rather than know the actual
in-depth fundamental foundational
education yeah do you think most of
these books that have most of like more
of a political spin and look one of the
other things that's kind of taboo in our
system of education is to talk about the
motivation of the author you're not
supposed to say I things that are that
are ad hominem but in most of these
cases these books are being written for
a reason and that may be really
antithetical to your philosophical
interests like I mean you're saying you
want to get it the foundations of why is
education taught this way how do these
assumptions come to be built up and
there are I mean most of them raised
very uncomfortable truths you know why
do we ring a bell to bring children in
from the schoolyard I have read it
claimed that that was based on the
Pavlov's dog experiments that you could
challenge to respond to ringing both
some of these things raised you know
uncomfortable truths development of
Education and the the role of you know
kind of heavy-handed role of the state
and forced assimilation and making
people into good military recruits and
definitely an in continental Europe the
first the first emergence of scientific
or rational education was was military
education because before that is many
before you have centralized education
what you have are isolated tutors and
they're mostly teaching you know
medieval you know christed christian
materials and then also things that
aristocrats value like dancing and
playing instruments and really useless
kind of stuff and then as mathematics
and science become more important in war
for as in metallurgy you know being able
to make metal becomes incredibly
important but also things like being
able to angle a cannon and shoot a
cannon ball and do logistics
they started needing math and science
education for the military so in many
parts of Europe the first steps forward
or in the military so
this is just a digression but being
really honest about the history and
philosophy of education may be totally
antithetical to the the author's motive
in writing the book yeah something
similar is true you know when you do the
the philosophy of Medicine in history of
medical science it's really dark it's
really depressing the stuff you get into
and you know a lot of it's about you
know kind of covering up dead bodies and
you know things that were done wrong and
killed huge numbers of people over long
periods of time and stupid ideas that
never got challenged or it's like again
it seems like right up until the 1970s
we were in the Dark Ages it's just
amazing how terrible the history of
medicine is until really recently and
when we did get something right it was
luck
you know we discovered the cure well not
even the cure for malaria which would
start a treatment for malaria by sheer
luck you know and never understood the
scientific principles and so on see the
the but if you want to read about that
history you need an author who's really
honest about it who's a critic yeah of
medical medical history who's who's
gonna show you all the staggering you
know down down the path of progress I'm
not someone who's trying to sell you a
dream and I think I mean this is one of
the problems with loss of education is
who's who's really gonna deal with this
who's really gonna deal with it because
we know look ultimately all these things
we have to learn from failure even the
examples of humanitarian work
fundamentally we have to learn from
failure but if you're not gonna be
honest about that failure you know we're
not gonna learn this a large part of
philosophy is propaganda and probably
philosophy of education is one of the
most you know propaganda heavy areas of
philosophy which is the same but you
know it is what it is hopefully I'll be
able to start making some contributions
to the subject because that's honestly
one of the most interesting subjects at
least for me to actually understand
nature of these things so I think but
when it comes to my dreams I don't just
want to reconstruct the education system
I think another imperative part of riki
[ __ ] the education system also to
reconstruct the research system how we
conduct ourselves in doing research
which would also have great implications
to the economic structure of society
like say for instance since your band's
case I think it may be the the the folio
failure of the of the economists that
they're they're going into financial
turmoil so if we if they've perhaps had
that a research system a more robust
approach to social science they would
also not be failing as hot as that they
are in the financial sector perhaps so I
think it's a very necessary parts to not
only just focus on reconstructing the
education system when you're doing such
a thing
you also need to focus on the other
fundamental parts to a functioning
society so let's actually move on I
wanted to learn more about you guys what
I mean let's let's first start talking
about um what exactly your fundamental
beliefs are when it comes to like Safe
Routes
certain facts about reality let's let's
start off this is basic is that so like
let's let's let's start off with like um
what do you think our ability to know
the world around us is and let's use the
vehicle of a piece epistemology or
metaphysics even like what approach to
reality do you have a you a naturalist
are you a super naturalist what kinds of
ideologies philosophically speaking do
you use to base your judgment and
attitudes to the world I think you know
so I could be called a skeptic so you
sounds like a bad joke people now say
classical liberal it's become the butt
of jokes can I say classical skeptic the
really ancient meaning of skeptic which
is in the philosophy of sex that's
empirica in that sense I can say my
epistemological approach is skeptical
not in the sort of you know 21st century
Internet use of the word word skeptic
but you know I just see a lot of the
problems of epistemology they again
they're implicitly or explicitly
directed towards the question of faith
in God they're about faith in things
unseen it's very rare that we're really
taking sort of the I don't know the
framework of the tools of epistemology
and and seriously inquiring into is this
is this apple orange or is it red yeah
you know if I perceive it as red and you
presume how do we truly know what is red
and what's orange and you know okay
these are these are problems we can we
can solve so I think a lot of the a lot
of the pessimism about empirical
knowledge in the European tradition is
trumped up in
to create a basis for belief in God or
belief in in abstractions truth beauty
valor justice universal human rights or
what have you but it is especially most
of the time it's God any of you give an
example a guy like Vic enstein his
philosophy of language it's it is it's
simply a basis for monotheism and again
people who don't know that it'll pick up
on that don't realize what the text is
doing but this isn't just talking about
the the meaning of words to say many
words again I'd say Immanuel Kant you
know critique of Pure Reason again it
actually is a theological work in that
sense it's final its final purposes
certainly would say a little bit about
what I mean when I say you know sex is
America's you know that the claim made
by sexist in Paris is when we really
inquire into things thoroughly we don't
come to certainty or uncertainty we come
to a kind of equanimity because we we're
comfortable or we're aware of what it is
we cannot know or how uncertain our
knowledge is yeah I wouldn't even say
equanimity I I'm willing to say doubt
I'm going to say that you can have a
dynamic kind of attitude of inquiry and
and and doubt and you've already heard
me say in a particular applied context I
think that's a better way to live then
constructing abstract beliefs but you
know so you ask the question you know
what can we know I don't think there's
any doubt about the extent to which we
can know that an apple is red and you
know your sense of when does something
stop being red and start being orange it
really is subjective mmm but again this
isn't actually a problem anyone
philosophically or politically is
struggling with you know we can get into
all the problems we really are showing
when I was in China and sir I mean it's
really when you have deep cultural
divisions that the perception of color
is gonna be different
I owned a jacket it was the same jacket
I was married in and I have different
photographs me wearing this jacket on
the internet cuz I had it for such a
long time and I perceived it as black
and all of the Chinese people around me
precedes it as green and it blew my mind
I was talking to my teacher of me I'm
talking in Chinese I was
like you know I'm saying Chinese green
you think okay and I opened the door to
the classroom and there was another
teacher and I said returnees pardon me
this jacket what what color would you
say
and she said green you know when the
lunch break came I went I went to lunch
and there were other white people eating
lunch there some what do you think this
jacket is Green no it's black yeah
they show this this kind of this kind of
a physiological problem can't exist
obviously this is a culturally
constructed notion of color and you know
the perception is different also we can
use a mass spectrometer or a laser or
something and you know measure how much
light reflects off this surface and
where does it fit on the spectrum we can
scientifically define when exactly does
it start start being a black or
Seraphine green but you know most of the
questions about your optimism or
pessimism they're not about empirical
knowledge yeah exactly about the steps
beyond the Pyrrhic all knowledge to
abstractions so really briefly I think
the the sickness of our society is that
people are taught from an early age to
believe that is a step from something
unreal to something more real so even
somebody like Immanuel Kant does that
the presumption is that we have
phenomenological reality the empirical
reality of what we see is their senses
and then whatever's beyond that is
something transcendent transcendental
more real than merely the redness of the
Apple or the the greenness of of my
jacket and you know already in
Schopenhauer so Chopin hours not an ILS
but you have this fundamental idea when
we're talking about an abstraction we're
talking about less information than
something we am perceived empirically
and to me that that was a fundamental
what really I already understood that I
didn't have the words for it
but it's a fundamental step forward for
any would say if you're raised kind of
in normal Western culture where you
realize that when we start dealing with
abstractions we're you know we're
dealing with human created conventions
that are that are less less information
not more it's not like Plato's theory of
forms it's not the true good or the true
beauty or the true justice or the true
God
we're moving away from exactly what we
can know into something that's
unknowable but obviously you know to
some extent in language useful I mean as
we said before I can use the word rubber
and even that word can be terribly
misleading you know what I talked about
rubber crops in in Laos so yeah and
that's obviously the theater and that's
that's one of the sensory many people
will say to you that studying philosophy
is is useless but one of the great
things about politics is that it shows
you the ways in which philosophy really
does make you make you sharp like you're
able to say well rubber doesn't mean
rubber it could actually on this context
rubber has two meanings yes you know I
think politics in that sense makes the
study of philosophy more rewarding
because this isn't this isn't just a
parlor game of debating how do how do we
truly know that an apple is red yeah
let's let's talk more about skepticism
which great subterranean or do you call
yourself in the FATA cool um well so
look it's really so Pierrot I don't I
don't think he has extent works I mean
so the memory of what Piero's philosophy
was we know through sex doesn't
Peregrine's maybe there are some little
some little fragments but I guess the
short answer is I'm I'm caronian but I
mean you know so to give a parallel
example when I talked to Isaac known as
ask yourself on the internet so Isaacson
internet personality is YouTube channels
called ask yourself he said of himself
that he considered himself only a
descriptive nihilist and not a
prescriptive nihilist yeah and then you
know he discussed what that meant to him
and so on and I said to oh well I think
actually in your terms I would be a
prescriptive nihilists not just a
descriptive one I think that's that's
the sense in which I'm not any of the
forms of classical skeptic is that it's
not merely a descriptive skepticism or
an analytical skepticism actually it's a
it's prescriptive that really what I'm
putting forward is is a kind of moral
claim you got two prescriptively
this is this is the way you ought to
live and and in a sense that also that
also kind of loosens it up on you in
another way because um
you know we all have to live with a
certain level of pragmatic belief yeah
you know what is and what isn't a good
saucepan and you could say okay look
there are some parts of my life where
I'm away or I'm relying on crude Dogma
um even geographically I can't really
apply my skepticism to all politics all
over the world sometimes you know I hear
a news report it was something going on
in Africa where I really don't know the
put I don't respond to it as skeptically
as I do something from Cambodia but I'm
aware I have that self-discipline okay
on the basis of this one newspaper
article that may be [ __ ] this is the
situation of what's what's happening in
Africa but I can't I can't be a good
skeptic all the time yeah yeah I do you
think like usually on the subject like
cuz you're familiar with the subject the
problem of skepticism right yes yeah do
you think it's even possible for us to
solve all those problems like just the
epistemic regress it's not a problem
that's even solvable and if it was to be
solved what kind of implications do you
think I would have on us as a society
okay so this is quite alien to me I had
a friend who was in philosophy
academically and he would refer to the
problem of skepticism and the problem of
nihilism as if they were they were
self-evident things it really is a sense
of my not understand what you what you
mean um no you know okay if someone is
is a theologian if they believe in the
monotheistic God then it's very clear
what they mean that they can't have
knowledge of God or can't have knowledge
of good and evil right um no I don't
again I don't think it's a problem that
we can't know whether or not the Apple
is red or that anyone saying they can't
know if Apple's exist at all maybe maybe
that is the problem if you want to you
know we can talk about that like do we
know an apple exists but I don't I don't
think that's that's the issue and you
know my response whether you're talking
about something abstract like good and
evil you know something abstract like
the monotheistic God or what have you
with all these abstractions I recently
used the the comparison of a speed limit
I don't believe speed limits exist
they're not real but there are cultural
conventions we create and we agree upon
actually even the colors are probably
like that we've already mentioned this
the concept of what exactly is green and
what is red and what is brown these
things will vary they're different in
China than they are in Canada the United
States or England um so he's bidding me
to keep talking and he'll be right back
I assume you guys at home would see that
he said he's not I can't for the moment
[Laughter]
anyway with engaging with abstractions
the fact that I can't know what is good
what is evil or any of these other kind
of super no fixed abstractions for me
that is a non a problem in the same
sense that it's incoherent that it's not
an on problem if someone asks how do you
know the true speed limit there is no
true speed limit speed limits aren't
something that exists in a supernal or
fixed form speed limits are something
that we can agree upon as a cultural
convention
it's an idea we can we can create we can
draw out of thin air and obviously we do
it for various pragmatic purposes to try
to save people's lives maybe to have
better ecology or what-have-you as we go
all right so I'm now filling for time as
Darin comes back to the table but mmm
you know in as much as in the Western
tradition people have tend to look at
philosophy as a search for truth with a
capital T as something abstract
something more real than merely
empirical reality where they can reach
beyond empirical experience and lay
their hands on the truth of the capital
T um that's not my conception of
philosophy so I don't share those
problems so in the same sense that I'm
not worried about knowing the true or
real speed limit I'm not worried about
knowing the true or real difference
between good and evil okay so like no
discussion before we had on discord I
think from from the
like really in-depth run-through of your
ideologies I came to the conclusion that
it seemed like you were a philosophical
pragmatic pragmatist a quasi realist and
you had some sort of it wasn't a
relativistic type framework of morality
okay what a that means to you so when
you say I'm a pragmatist does that mean
anything particular to you I mean you
know I do know the kind of Wikipedia
definition of rhyme with is something in
the sense that you treat philosophy is a
very um as something that just gives us
a better idea of how to apply apply
critical thinking or what have you in in
like an academic sense or in a
scientific sense that is only used as a
specific tool not necessarily a subject
that and of itself is like a useful
thing like it's only supposed to be some
sort of residue of the sciences or
perhaps I'm thinking about logical
empiricism but like I'm and I'll
actually also be questioned about that
later but um a practices yes so they
ignore oh yeah the medieval concept of
philosophy that continued up to the 18th
century was philosophy as the handmaiden
of theology yeah so work philosophy was
really linked to the church and what it
was doing and then the what superseded
that was the concept of philosophy as
the queen of the sciences yes though for
example as I recall the the PhD thesis
of Hegel GWF Hegel was some remarks on
the flaws on the behavior of fire some
remarks on the behavior of fire as I
recall and there was a debate between
Schopenhauer Hegel about the behavior of
a horse's legs while running whether or
not all of the legs of the horse were
ever off the ground or if they always
had one foot on the ground this kind of
thing so you know there was a period of
trying to package philosophy as as the
queen of the sciences um you know it's
interesting to me that in Aristotle
already there's instead the fundamental
idea that politics is the queen of
Sciences that the top of the apex the
ultimate you know philosophy or
technique or area of study ultimately is
how these things contribute
to how we're gonna organize you know a
society and in who's in power and and
who gets what
who's richer news poor etc um so you
know look you sure if someone's
approaching me from philosophy of
Sciences I can see why they see me as a
pragmatist but it's true my purpose is
never really scientific I mean yeah not
just I remember I read a passionate
essay about linguistics and Laos so a
lot of what I've done is also overlaps
with linguistics it allows indigenous
people in Canada in Asia various
languages and this guy made this
passionate statement that you know
linguistics is a science and it's
fundamental purpose and objective is to
provide a complete description of all
the methods of communication on planet
earth you know and I remember just
reading them thinking I have absolutely
no interest in being in that field you
know if that's what linguistics is you
know I'm not I'm not part of the the
field of mystics it seems you know and I
mean I think that is it that is a
scientific conception if someone works
in the study of insects or fish or
something and they say well what we want
to do is explore the whole of the ocean
and provide an encyclopedic description
of every single fish that ever swam in
the ocean you know maybe going back to
the fossil record of today I understand
that but that's that's not my view of
life on Earth and that's not the way I
think of philosophy or politics so sure
I mean you could say you could say I'm a
pragmatist but obviously it's it's
ultimately all of it comes down to a
kind of political and moral purpose sure
yes what would you say is your purpose
perhaps uses a vehicle to explain what
that moral purpose is what is your moral
framework what so well what do you
actually subscribe to when it comes to
ethical theories right so my delusion is
that I don't have one you know my
delusion is that I'm strong enough to
stand with no moral framework whatsoever
so no you've already seen the video and
now I think most people are
many people have spoken to they reject
that they think oh no well that's
impossible you must have one and you're
just in denial about it but you know I
gave you the example you I know you've
already seen the video so you can say
very briefly of a man who sees a cow in
a field yeah you asked the question
would you get down on your hands and
knees and drink the milk out of this
cow's udder now I don't think I need a
moral framework to kind of answer this
question and and and and deal with this
scenario um you know I want to do
humanitarian work in Laos and by the way
I did a lot of research I learned a lot
but the actual amount of humanitarian
work I did was relatively modest so by
the way I'm not I'm not boasting that I
accomplished a lot in Deebo I learned a
lot but uh the amount of humanitarian
difference I made was very very small
nevertheless okay so Laos is a country
that's literally full of craters because
it's been bombed so heavily by the
United States it may or may not be the
number one most bombed country on planet
Earth in the history of the world the
United States dropped more bombs on Laos
than were dropped on Germany and Japan
combined during World War two that's out
so you know you can look at that and be
like no do I need a moral framework to
you know obviously there are other
factors here let's just say okay you
know this is a problem what can I do to
improve it kind of what can I do to help
what one positive role I can play now
look I think partly this has to do with
your analysis of human nature and to
what if then human nature does vary
between individuals I think I don't know
if I could say most people or most
philosophers
I mean maybe most philosophers would say
well gee you know eyes'll the majority
of white men who go to Laos just want to
get drunk and smoke opium there's a lot
of opium tourism you know people who are
there to smoke smoke drugs in marijuana
but also opium or use other drugs they
want to go to discos and they want to
sleep with prostitutes
um you can see why the majority of
people are going to last and you eyes
old you know me I specifically I went
there I did historical research I was
you know ancient stone inscriptions
handwritten manuscripts I was studying
languages I was studying politics and
philosophy and I was trying to do
humanitarian work
so therefore if so facto the difference
must be that you have some kind of
belief maybe a religious belief or
ethical or some kind of framework that
differentiates you from those people
that that sounds like an excuse to me
that sounds to me like a way of not
really dealing with you know what what
the difference is and you know I think
the real difference might be might be
more disturbing so an unrelated but I
think you know meaningful comparison you
may have noticed that a lot of people
just want to dismiss Adolf Hitler as
insane and maybe it's more disturbing to
deal with the fact that he was wrong you
know but made decisions you know in in
the same kind of way that that you and I
do that his manner of thinking was not
you know was not so different maybe it's
more disturbing to understand that so I
mean the difference between people and
how they play out I understand why some
people would assume this is because of a
really strictly posited
you know moral moral framework um and
you know even looking at things like you
know desire and I mean sorry let's just
say again you know being a nihilist this
doesn't mean that I believe or sort of
this word believing um obviously you
know that there are even aesthetic
differences between people that can run
tremendously deep so I've known gay
people in my life but I'm entirely
heterosexual I also known bisexual
people and you know it's not a belief
it's not a difference in moral framework
ideology and honor even on an aesthetic
level you know there is a sense in which
they perceive the world you know
differently from idea they see beauty in
men and so on when I when I don't and
what-have-you um the way they perceive
in the way they feel is actually
different you know you know so if we
were a really nice question why is it
that I look at you know the bomb craters
in Laos and the history and the polity
of zoom using the bomb craters
a symbol for the whole political
historical situation it's not like I
literally just looked at a photograph of
longer why do I look at it and respond
to that as an opportunity for
humanitarian work and research and
somebody else responds to it literally
going there to find cheap prostitutes
yeah the guy's looking for cheap
prostitutes they outnumber me by about a
thousand to one in this case maybe I've
chosen a good example it's not because
they're members of a different religion
from me it's not because they're
Catholic and I'm atheist I mean you know
if the roles were reversed maybe you'd
say that or something but it doesn't
it's not because they're Muslim and I'm
a nihilist or something um you know to
get into why that is I think it might be
it might be more disturbing and
obviously this is this is a difference
between people that's that's quite a bit
more common than the difference between
Adolf Hitler and and you and I yeah so
we just had the more important
discussion with you about psychology
rather than morality when it comes to
diagnosing
telling what we need to do to people
with people like this like Adolf Hitler
is just more important to talk about the
psychology than the morality is in
general um look you know okay I guess
this is maybe struck on one of the ways
in which I was influenced by
Schopenhauer just because showed me the
will and desire you know so so central
to our discourse differences in what I
desire are not differences in what I
believe and again already even some like
homosexuality versus heterosexuality
aesthetic differences and you know that
I see this as a learning opportunity and
an opportunity humanitarian work as
opposed to else I just I don't think
those those fall under the rubric of
belief or faith or even moral framework
okay in terms of a moral framework you
know I do say to you all the time what I
talked about is doing the best you can
yeah I think it's different from trying
to do good or trying to serve the will
of God or you know nationalism or some
other abstract and again I think part of
the tragedy of life is understanding
that many of the people whom you may
perceive as evil are from their
perspective trying to do the best they
can and in most cases they're struggling
to make money the only way they know how
or the way they're most familiar with so
obviously as a vegan you know you know I
just saw some footage of people cutting
down a forest and in Indonesia and
killing orangutangs but whether you're
looking at cutting down a forest or
running a slaughterhouse the reality is
I mean there are I'm totally open to
questions of good and evil it's not like
I'm saying these words should be taken
out of the dictionary yeah we all know
that most of what we're dealing with are
people who are trying to live a good
life and trying to live a meaningful
life and are struggling to do the best
they can and are earning money the way
they know how and they're not
questioning you know they're not
questioning a lot of things there and
but even the flip side of that they're
probably also spending money the only
way they know how many people people
want to be happy and people want to be
loved and if they do that by getting
drunk and sleeping with prostitutes you
know that's the same I you know that's
the same set of impulses that's the same
attempt to find a solution to these to
these problems and yeah so you know
again my pretense my claim is that I'm
living without a moral framework and you
know if if I'm wrong then I think the
sense in which I'm wrong is going to be
at such a low level it's going to be a
such a low level of cognition that I
might as well be right and yeah you know
like you know I do believe red is red
and and green is green and black is
black there are you know yeah but yeah
and and you know but I don't think but
it's what point was I don't think doing
the best you can is something that
separates me from those guys who are on
permanent vacation and going to the soil
because they also in their way are doing
the best they can and that's probably
why but that's probably why people are
so afraid of new ideas like veganism
yeah present someone hey look you know
there's another way to live you know
there's another way to spend your money
maybe another way
you know hey there's another way because
most these people already care about
ecology well is another way to solve
that problem there's another way to have
an impact and a lot of people can see a
respond they don't want to know about it
because as soon as they do know about it
now there's this you know there's this
wait there's this onus on them to change
to start living more more and alignment
with with what does they know ya know it
seems to me that you perhaps fall in
line with the type of moral intuitions
so like how would you be able to say to
anyone else if they were doing something
that's outright wrong or perhaps
outright not in their own best interest
despite them saying clearly that they
want to do something if it's going to go
if they're actually the exact opposite
direction of that how exactly do you
approach them in a way that actually
tells them that what they're doing isn't
actually in the best interest how do you
do that okay so I don't I don't consider
myself an intuitionist and but oh I'll
give you I'll give you a prime example I
think this I think this is answering
your your question um so look I've given
you the example that I don't I don't
believe in speed limits but there's a
sense in which I do believe it like ie I
think it is a good thing to have speed
limits I just don't think they really
exists there were cultural convention
there's something we create and the
something I'm afraid against a blank
canvas there isn't some objectively real
standard we can work against okay now
almost everyone believes that pedophilia
is evil bad wrong that it should be
illegal there is actually no consensus
on what is the age of consent at what
age does does pedophilia stop being a
crime and also understand there's no
consensus among children internationally
um how many years in prison does the
crime result they know you might you
might think there'd be a universal
standard you might think the whole world
would have the same year but like speed
limits I mean the point is there is an
understanding that there there should be
a limit somewhere and then we're gonna
create a limit and whatever a limit we
create is in a sense arbitrary right it
should the speed limit be 65 or 70 or 55
or armed or 30 or 100 you know the
they're possible but the most
fundamental assumption here which isn't
gonna exist in every society is that
there's one speed limit for everyone
that there's one age of consent for
everyone even that even that we could
throw out no but even that we through it
we could say okay you you have a better
car because you drive this type of car
the speed limit is 80 for you you have a
better driver's license you passed the
test you know you drive it you're an a
grade-a driver for you the speed limit
is 80 but for him he has a worse
driver's license for him at 6 you could
have that kind of system right but the
the the deep assumption is one way or
another people are going to come
together they're gonna discuss this and
then they're then they're gonna set the
limit so in in seeing that as arbitrary
and culturally conventional and existing
and in written law and so on um you know
that's I don't think there's any
intuition involved if there were a moral
intuition these things would presumably
be universal or there'd be no debate or
there'd be no real role for democracy in
them and you know even something like
murder I mean we when you get into
details of okay even something I suppose
more how many years do you go to prison
for murder for you know I'm there
actually is no whole international or
even now it's it's not it's not
something easily decided at all I mean
okay my goodness I'm so broad that
murder is bad well yeah and then you get
into what is the difference we first a
free murder and second-degree murder you
know what if it's a thief who broke into
your house and you can get these kinds
of details so no I wouldn't identify as
an intuitionist and again my perspective
is being a nihilist means that I'm much
more able to deal with these questions
and contradict to me they're not
contradictions sorry really briefly but
I think this puts a human face on it
yeah I had an employer so he was my boss
he was my boss at work and he had for
decades
you could tell you've been telling the
same story again again he was an old man
he had four decades at cocktail parties
been stating his opinion that he thought
the the age of consent should be lowered
dramatically he thought the age of
consent should be when a girl has her
period
and he alluded to there are various
ancient cultures with a lot of ancient
cultures people got married at 13 years
old they were happy there were
pre-modern cultures this is normal and
you know he did this in a in a kind of
self congratulatory way now I think
nobody in his life had ever challenged
his belief he dealt with Christian you
know kind of standard you know ideologue
true believer responses you know some
people think it should be 18 or 16 or
whatever or people just yelled at him
what have you and you know um the way I
responded to him is is closer to
Socratic method I asked him what kind of
a society do you want to live in do you
want to live in a society where it's not
safe for thirteen-year-old girls to go
with a group of their friends to
McDonald's like they can't go to a
McDonald's without their father
accompanying them or an uncle or a male
because you know fully grown men can hit
on them and seduce them where that's
culturally and legally acceptable I say
you know I accept that it's it's a
completely artificial contrivance like
the speed limit you can set it at 16 or
18 that only at a certain age is it
acceptable for men to start seducing
young women right and you know again it
could be 21 I don't think anymore on
earth it's 21 but I don't know you know
but whether it's 19 or 18 or 16 or
whatever whatever it's gonna be but what
this creates is a culture where girls
can go unaccompanied to McDonald's and
it's understood by everyone
they're not gonna flirt with them
they're not gonna engage in they're not
gonna attempt to seduce them yeah so
again this is like a speed limit a speed
limit benefits us all it changes you
know the way we live in society now so
this was a nihilistic response you
notice this is not based on good and
evil and this is not even based on the
presumption of the victim suffering
right because as you know there will be
counter examples there'll be some
example of someone at 13 who got married
and was totally happy or whatever I'm
you know people are gonna people are
gonna be able to make into something so
and this is not based on on on any of
that and you know I think you know I
think
could say he was a little bit devastated
by this you know the conversation you
know you know went on from there
so again I don't think this is intuition
ISM I think this is a kind of rigorously
rational approach that proceeds from
believing in nothing to believing in
nothing but along the way you know shows
up well what the options are no sorry
and then look front final conclusion on
them with with speed limits and with the
age of consent and with how we're gonna
treat murder there were gonna be
measurable outcome different so early
early in the conversation I was saying
to you well if you do if you look at
philosophy ocation you got to measure
the outcomes if you do humanitarian work
you gotta look at the outcomes um if the
speed limit is too high
a lot of people are gonna die if the age
of consent is too high like if it's 21
too many people gonna be more into
prison it's like you know everyone's
gonna be going to prison because they
they start having sex at 19 and that's
illegal because the age of consent so
anymore you know obviously there are
going to be measurable outcomes so in
sing at the arbitrary and so on
but this kind of discussion is going to
guide us to making a reasonable decision
it's not gonna guide us towards a
distinction between good and evil
yeah so what why because like you have
this very nihilistic approach to things
we're talking is commendable to be very
intellectually honest that's that's
definitely something that's I'm struck
by but what do you think people have
such a negative attitude towards nihilus
in the first place yeah so nihilism had
one period where it was regarded
positively and that was the period of
Russian nihilism before the Revolution
yeah there was a time when nihilism had
a good name and one of the slogans was
and this slogan still means something to
me um go to the poor be the poor yeah
that's interesting in itself because you
know nihilism you know you might think
they're slow in case you expect they're
slow going to be forget it just live in
luxury for yourself or something no
nihilism is not necessarily linked to
narrow self-interest or self
intelligence what have you I think
there's an interesting argument that
some other philosophies like
libertarianism may be linked to you know
that
that kind of tendency but that the
charity Limpopo charitable impulse was
there from the first so nihilism
actually had a relatively good
reputation for that one period in Russia
and then once the Communists came to
power they started vilifying the
nihilists and indeed hunting them down
and killing them because they killed
just about everyone who didn't support
the the Bolsheviks in the revolution
Aryan and Civil War period and things
didn't get a lot better after that with
Lenin and Stalin and so on so they were
written down negative negative way in in
terms the history books um you know does
nihilism have a worse name today then
skepticism or atheism I mean look I feel
confident that I can defend myself when
people have a low opinion of me a bad
opinion me when I want to describe
myself as a nihilist I noticed that the
government of China describes their
enemy the enemy of communism in China as
historical nihilism that's the term they
use for the opposite of communism so
from me part of it is saying okay that's
exactly what I am you know what's funny
you say the opposite of having faith in
communism is historical nihilism well
that's me
well I'm exactly someone who looks at
the lessons of history and sees that
there's nothing to believe in there you
know I feel I'm learning the lesson of
history and I'm rejecting your
totalitarian system of belief so what
I'm hopeful of is that in its small way
exactly the repression nihilism has had
in in Russia it's real in China it's
more abstract and hypothetical um that
you know that can become something
positive that can blossom and that we
can we can kind of identify with
positively those of us for whom
basically atheism is not enough and
skepticism is not enough yeah and I just
mentioned even specifically someone like
like Max Turner who is he's
self-described as an egoist I feel that
that's also not enough I don't think
it's challenging enough for me or
challenging enough for for society
yeah now back to the question of du
quois of a prescriptive nihilists is her
actually
two approaches they can call yourself a
prescriptive nihilist in the sense that
you believe people ought to be Annihilus
we can use prescriptive nihilus in the
sense that you believe that no such
thing as a horse so would you say that
you agree with both of them okay so look
earlier on in the discussion it was
clear I put a lot of value on democracy
I mean I think the real question is not
do you believe in aunt but do you
believe in coercion ultimately by state
power or the law I mean that that's
really what comes down to and I
mentioned this is not totally abstract
because for example the
anarcho-capitalist s-- and the the
libertarians there were people who
opposed that right now I would I what I
believe in strongly believe in i I do
see a really large sphere of acceptable
use of force and regulation and how else
to put a coercion use of coercion not to
bring about change of progress you and I
both we didn't even challenge that we
talked about education we def totally
assumed that if parents are raising
their child illiterate the government is
the right to say no your kids gonna
learn how to read you know parents are
against reading forget it if the parents
don't want their kid to use soap kid is
gonna learn in class so prevents illness
no this is not this is this is mandatory
and we one of my favorite examples to
use is sewage treatment
anarcho-capitalists believe you should
be allowed to dump your poo in the river
I don't believe that I totally believe
it I totally support the the the policy
of you know coercing people into
flushing their poo into the sewage
system and having a scientific sewage
treatment so I'm gonna okay so this is
abstract question over there so I will
answer your question of what the
abstract aunt so in in the real world
the real art is coercion is state power
is law I care a lot about democracy but
I'm not a libertarian I'm not an
anarchist I'm not an air capitalist or
what have you
I think you know we come to conclusions
like if people drink water that has poo
in it they get cholera so you're not
gonna allow people to dump their sewage
water
apart from ecological end and other
concerns okay so that's the real world
OTT is dealing with coercion and pain
for a necklace just very quickly
sure yeah dude like you have a disdain
for analysts and if for any particular
reason I'll just write down abstract on
it is to come back to it yeah you know
the way I feel about that one of the
first videos I made on utilitarianism
it's still up well I think all my videos
talk on my channel I don't know if I've
deleted much of anything
a couple or I've over over 900 videos
but anyway one of the first ones I said
something which which may be shallow but
is true about utilitarianism and I'm
gonna say it here about anarchism too I
pointed out look when you look at any of
the major ethical and political
questions of our generation or of
several centuries um
when has the position of the
utilitarians mattered you know did the
utilitarians have a position on the
Vietnam War that mattered or expects
wines that when you go through the list
and I I think that really is a challenge
to anarchism also now anarchism is a
relatively enormous movement compared to
utilitarianism
I mean utilitarian it's really it's a
couple of people in academia and there's
kind of nothing else to show for it I'm
anarchist they do manage to get enough
people together to have a riot
every so often it and that sort of thing
oh well yeah I mean when you asked about
your question was posed as disdain um
that is a reason to have disdain for
anarchism now anarchism I think is a
philosophy that can work as a critique
but as a critique only so you know the
same way I mean Catholics Catholicism
can work as a critique you can read a
criticism of the in justices of life in
Saudi Arabia written by a dogmatic
Catholic who's really just trying to
push to convert people to Christianity
that's their bias but it's still a
totally good report on how [ __ ] up the
Saudi Arabians society is how so you
know the fact that someone's
ideologically wrong when they're there
their philosophy said positively doesn't
mean that they
use it productively once they did
negatively when used nipper T so Eric
ISM can be very productive security
however anarchists cannot even deal with
these types of questions we've just
talked about
I've okay how is sewage treatment gonna
work and most of the time the response
they get from a Turkish is just to
guffaw and land do you engage in hand
waving how you know the value of liberty
and freedom is so great how can you
possibly you know contrast it to you
know sewage treatment so well that's
exactly what I have to do you know I
don't believe in an abstract notion
called freedom I'm a nihilist I don't
believe in your God and I don't believe
in sacrificing sewage treatment on the
altar of your bloodthirsty God in school
and you know whatever you have in mind
when you say freedom you know I also can
use the word freedom but again it's not
taking out the dictionary for me um
people getting cholera and dying having
to poo in a bucket and dump the bucket
in the river that's that's not really
what I'm thinking about when I think
about freedom I don't think it's what
you are either you know if you're the
anarchist in reality they're probably
diluting zone so no let's let's get
serious let's really talk about sewage
treatment I mean you know let's talk
about public education let's talk about
you know all the things that that really
well let's have to open up prisons are
run and operated to me those are very
very fundamental questions that
anarchism utterly fails sila so that's
another reason to have some degree of
contempt for foreigners okay so come
back to your earlier questions that I
wrote down do that again in case so I
talked about the the real world ought
which comes down to state power the the
abstract thought okay when people ask
about the existence of an abstract god
what they really mean is is there a
characteristic of ought that we ought to
do something that is true for all people
in all times in all cultures that is
what they mean they don't mean is there
something I personally feel I ought to
do I ought to clean the dishes you know
I you know I ought to
and I get some to buy groceries nobody
is questioning that the question is of
what I would call a supernal odd or an
objectively real odd now you've already
hear me say I don't really believe
there's an objectively real difference
between red and brown or between green
and black that exists for everyone in
all cultures
now I also think it's a problem like I
don't think that cognitively impedes us
it leads to some funny situations as
well I don't believe there's an
objectively real distinction between
where the speed limit is at but it's
somewhere right
etc etc so no I don't believe in that
sense in an abstract odd but again the
reverse is right we come together we we
have these we have these cultural
conventions we have laws we have you
know state coercion and so on and you
know you you can talk about art and you
can talk about requirements within those
within those contexts if if you have
chosen to build a bridge that's choice
you don't have to build a bridge you can
choose not to but you can have a boat
going for okay what what are we to do
with this bridge where do we you get
into requirements that make sense look
if the bridge is gonna be this long it
has to be this high it has to be this
strong it has to have this budget you
might wanna have a lower budget might
make you burn oh if it's too cheap it's
gonna be dangerous so we have
requirements in arts that are true
within this contexts and with these
cultural conventions etc etc but knowing
an absolute odd or universal odd
obviously does not exist and it exists
much less than an absolute speed limit
but an absolute and Universal difference
between red and brown yeah you say that
your favorite discussions and
discussions of morality and myopic
thoughts that seem to be brought up as a
result of people believe in things like
utilitarianism or even deontology well I
mean look there's a difference between
kind of chalkboard philosophy and
real-world philosophy word where it has
consequences
um on the chalkboard I guess I
understand why people get hung up on
these things and they ask
they demand to know um you know is it
possible for me to convince others of my
morality for someone else to share my
sense of aught that's really what it
comes down to yeah
is it possible for me to convince you
Darrin that a painting you regarded this
painting as ugly and worthless and I say
and I talked it through with you we
stand there in the echo I said well what
you don't realize is this is his
approach this is what he's saying this
is the significance of the painting
whether that's in vogue otherwise and
now you see it as beautiful or
meaningful or valuable you didn't before
okay so I've convinced you of an art of
a convinced you of a value or something
but there's nothing real here none of it
exists right yeah and that's okay I mean
the thing is unless you're a
disillusioned monotheists or you're like
Plato or something you have some really
bizarre philosophy about you know
objective morality existing and you're
you're mourning the loss of this
objective morality um
there's nothing wrong in that picture
I'm not left you know reaching into
abstractions trying to find some
objectively real standard of beauty or
what-have-you but yes I can convince
others of my my my moral beliefs or my
moral conclusions or ever you want to
put it they can share on that but it's
completely subjective even when it's
inter subjective and that's okay yeah oh
when it comes to being subjective do you
delineate its
into two different discrete types of
subjectivity like say for instance
relativism versus a physiological
objectivity do you even do that or do
you just treat it all as relative
necessarily yeah I guess I guess the
truth is I don't because I'm not I'm not
ever in a circumstance where you you
need to divide it into into one of the
other but I think it is true that we do
in 2018 we talk about cognitive nihilism
which is more this this epistemological
thing as opposed to moral nihilism or
cosmological nihilism or what I talked
about you know historical nihilism
but yeah otherwise no I haven't I
haven't really had a reason to to
separate into into categories that way
you know one that gives the
epistemological side of it it rarely
comes up over
or explicitly but it really does inform
things silently and implicitly even that
example of me talking to my boss the
fact that I didn't respond to that by
saying to him you're a bad person
because you know you believe in sex with
underage girls like there's no it's not
coming back in that way the fact that I
respond the way that I did
that's what reflects the epistemology
but it's not like I'm responding to him
by asking an epistemological question
Wow
how do we know the significance of the
number 18 you know not where I'm gonna
go with it yeah yeah so what do you what
would you say are your because this
could have tie-ins to your um your moral
not moral your political ideologies what
exactly do follow the left-wing do you
follow the right-wing you fell into the
centrist or four-carat libertarian etc
what exactly would you call yourself
would you basically tie yourself into
politically speaking right so you can
you can probably guess this is very
parallel to a lot of the answers I've
given before yeah you know it would
depend on which culture I was living in
and and where I was and so on and I
don't mean that in a shallow way or as
an evasion so in a recent video you know
I pointed out well
some people consider me conservative and
some people consider me left-wing if I
lived in Texas I think I'd be considered
left-wing I did some research on the
politics of Greece and it seemed to me
that in Greece at that time I would have
been at about the center of the
political spectrum I would have been a
kind of mainstream Democrat you know on
on most of the issues that were there
when I lived in Taiwan in Taiwan there
is no left versus right dichotomy they
have an independent test versus
reunification aesthetical spectrum and
you know where where I stand in
Taiwanese politics is different um you
know so the history of so I again I
mentioned this in a recent video people
used to call me an erogenous
within Buddhism I like to refer things
to their origins the difference between
left and right goes back to the French
Revolution the creation of the rebel
Neri Parliament and there were other
very specific political terms that
actually firmed to the layout of that of
that room there was actually a bump in
the floor that was jokingly referred to
as the mountain and people who happened
to sit next to the Melton it was
referred to as a mountainous tendency
you know it's just because the the
floorboards were warped and that that
part of the room but the people who
actually sat on the left side of the
room as opposed to the right side of the
room um that was where that where that
idea first came from the seating
arrangements in the the French
Revolutionary Parliament which were
watched and influenced conceptions
throughout Europe right now in the
United States of America is it left-wing
or right-wing to be Anti Corruption to
want reforms that get-get corruption in
the government the answer is its it's
neither one alright is it left-wing or
right-wing you know to want to make you
know cutting the foreskin off an infant
illegal so so this is called
circumcision you know cutting the
cutting off part of an infant's penis
illegal it's it's neither one now there
are other examples that are kind of
examples in a sense it shouldn't be
left-wing to care about first nations
languages indigenous peoples languages
creative way mohawk any weight or
what-have-you but again I'm a nihilist
I'm I'm gonna tell if it is in reality
where I live in Canada it seems like
only left-wing people care about that
issue yeah you know maybe I'm wrong a
little change but it's a very small
minority it's a very weak issue with the
left there's no and you can also see
there's no connection there's no
meaningful sense in which it is you know
a left-wing issue so again now some
people would respond as percent well
aisel this is really about
self-knowledge well yeah my I know what
I care about
I know what what my desires are and what
objectives on what indeed even like I
asked most I know what kind of society I
want to live in so I don't know about
all these isolated issues oh okay no
one's veganism is veganism the left-wing
issue or right-wing
in a sense it's neither or it should be
neither there's nothing left wing about
about veganism there's nothing left wing
about ecology but it's quite likely if
you're watching this in Texas probably
in Texas only left-wing people care
about ecology what do you think about
people who say that they use them is
necessarily intersectional okay great
question but yeah so this question was
so I'll write down intersectional okay
this question was you know am I left
where am i right where do I stand these
things so I think you know Sarah can
look at this and say okay so I have
self-knowledge I know but the particular
objectives I want or have you and then I
can look at the left and right and
figure out you know what I want to do
yeah in as much as that's true that's
what everyone should do and you should
and you know it may take years I mean
whatever you're relatively young you
know you may figure out I mean like most
people have never even thought about
prison reform okay once you think about
it holy [ __ ] this is a huge issue you
know what's the full education reform
you're already on to his education
reform a left-wing issue or right-wing
issue is prison reform it's these issues
once you know them understand them
you're not gonna feel at home probably
anywhere on the political spectrum maybe
you're lucky and you live in a country
where these issues are debated and are
our mainstream mainstream part of
politics though I think this is also
part of the reality of true democracy is
that true democracy would be able to
capture you know express and debate
these issues and fake democracy can't
fake democracy is just not okay what's
next
anyway I don't I don't think it's both
self knowledge someone else might see it
that way and there's some truth to that
you know again what I really credit for
this is nihilism is that I don't think
in ideological terms about these things
you know even if in the end I'm gonna
take the pieces together and maybe I'm
gonna cynically write a speech that
tries to convince left-wing people to
care about prison reform um you know
what what I'm doing I'm not thinking
etiology intellectually I'm not starting
from an ideal or concluding with an
ideal or matters of belief and thus I
see the world in this in this different
way and over time it takes time
issue-by-issue i build up a
sophisticated kind of portfolio of
political
political opportunities to make the
world a better place that I'm looking up
and if I could make if I could make the
world a better place by being a member
of the Conservative Party I'd do it
right right now it doesn't seem to be
the case if I could make the world a
better place by being a member of a
left-wing party you know I'd probably do
it too you know with some some caveats
in both cases how much how much you have
to tolerate them
so the intersectional issue look
intersectional ISM is is really a
chalkboard philosophy it exists at
academic conferences and not much else
so I think the first misconception
vegans have some vegans have some vegans
have the misconception that
intersectional ISM is a big movement
that veganism can co-opt and you know if
veganism can latch on to it and make
itself more important and I really feel
the opposite is true I think
intersectional ISM is a very narrow
academic discipline and veganism is
gonna make itself narrower and smaller
and weaker by trying to latch onto that
and get involved so that's that's that's
a pragmatic argument the
counter-argument is the the central
notion of intersectional ism the concept
of overlapping oppressions you know
could this be useful for veganism maybe
sometimes just barely and how so look in
Sri Lanka the butchers are almost all
Muslim why because Buddhists believe
Buddhists believe killing animals causes
bad karma in general the Hindus don't
want that kind of job that's probably
small number of Buddhists and Hindus who
slaughter animals okay so you have an
ethnic and religious difference it is
ethnic to what the Muslims are
ethnically different from the Sinhalese
Buddhists or the Tamil Hindus or what
have you so you have an ethnic
difference related to production of me
does that make intersectional ISM kind
of useful or meaningful here and in
preaching veganism in this in this
context I honestly don't see the utility
I don't see how that's used but it's
totally a situation where you know there
were overlapping questions of race
ethnicity oppression religion and and
veganism and animal slaughter sure the
actual publications I've seen that have
come out of vegan intersectional ISM are
garbage so I'm not optimistic about it
yeah but you know on the other I look
hey I'm a nihilist I'm profoundly
open-minded if someone was really gonna
do something you know productive with
that I mean you know I mean looking and
the other the other thing is I mean you
wouldn't call it intersectional ism but
I mean taking advantage of opportunities
like the positive connection between
veganism and Buddhism can you do Sling
positive of that be be you know yeah so
you know I mean can you take advantage
of a positive connection between
veganism and african-american culture
and hip-hop maybe but that kind of thing
we normally don't describe as
intersectional ism because
intersectional ism is really just this
this academic discipline yeah you can
tell I'm I'm keeping all the way real
this would be more entertaining video if
I if I gave you a kind of ATS JW rant
that's that's not what I do yes like
respect the honesty that's absolutely
does it's perfect so like um do you
think that is important to preserve
things from exist from X what's the word
like when things go into extinction area
you have that whole preference for
things to not go into extinction and if
it if you do is it moral or is it
aesthetic um so I assume you're talking
within the human realm here you're not
talking about species you're talking
about animals going state you know but
elements of human culture and language
culture extinction and species just in
general well okay good I mean I think to
me they're to two very different things
so look you know
I have no problem with the tradition of
circumcision going extinct I think that
would be an absolutely better place I
think that was something we looked back
on as part of our historical past that
we'd evolved out of the reality is you
look at something like I think the mean
the main example people questioned about
is why should the cree language exist in
the future or the aegean which so
doesn't know that our language is
indigenous to canada well again it's a
bit like the morality of building a
bridge if you want to build this bridge
you've got to spend a certain amount of
money and commit a certain amount of
resources it's got to be a certain span
a certain idea there were minimum
requirements yeah if you want Canada to
be a democracy that is not built on
genocide you know the meaning of
genocide in this context we all
understand we know what that would mean
not genocide the opposite of genocide
what that would really mean it is is a
wide open question in Canada what would
be a Canada that's not built on genocide
and you know the number of elected
members of parliament we've had who are
First Nations is incredibly tiny the
role of these languages in our society
is so marginal it's way more marginal
than Chinese the Chinese languages
everywhere and so on so you know these
are questions that come up come up in
the sense now you know is there an
absolute value intrinsic to the language
or intrinsic to the tradition I don't I
don't believe in any absolute values I
don't know is intrinsic you know to
anything but you know in Europe should
the French people just stop speaking
French they could all just speak English
or they could all just speak German and
maybe there'd be in an economic
advantage that nobody is discussing this
possibility there's no debate about the
French language going extinct with it
within within Europe but you know um
yeah I think if we were going to really
rigorously philosophically or political
you know discuss that that that that
matter you know then then we'd get into
you know what in what sense is the
existence of the French language you
know a good thing or a bad thing or
required by this or that this is that
vision of society sure but no obviously
you know it's it's impossible to believe
in tradition for the sake of tradition
it's impossible to look believin in
preservation for the sake of of
preservation because you know that that
would look at this point especially when
we're talking about these these really
marginalized cultures nobody is
suggesting that the Cree in a jib way
should be allowed to fight wars and take
people slaves and have a farm economy
based on slaves who are taken captive in
war that was part of their traditional
culture there's no discussion of
reviving that you know the question is
now when they're their culture and
religion and languages have been so
devastated the question is what what can
survive it there's no there's no
question there's no question whether or
not they're gonna use soap there's no
debate they open they want to use soap
that want to use toothpaste they want to
use the internet and bang machines
oh those those debates are dead so the
question is what what can we salvage and
you know I mean for me so I grew up
Jewish to some extent I grew up
communist to a much greater extent my
parents were communist is a much more
important part of my upbringing yeah is
there any fragment of Judaism that I I
preserve him of is there any fragment of
communism that I probably not you know
probably it's it's actually at zero so I
think generally with I just pointed out
generally in questioning tradition most
of those discussions are over at that
that end of the spectrum or is there any
little scrap of tradition you're gonna
you're gonna keep it all and you know
the exceptions would be looking at like
Afghanistan today you know Afghan it can
we convince the people of Afghanistan
that it's better to have daughters that
are literate rather than illiterate yeah
really
can we really destroy this cultural
tradition is that's
we're talking about vigilance or
absolutely hostile relationship so yeah
and then it's a very different kind of
kind of discourse yeah yes but you see
my answer I I think nothing that I just
said can be applied to habitat
conservation for wild animals yeah I
just say so I mean you you provocatively
suggested that the same answer might
might serve for both but I think that's
that's actually a totally different
questions which is bad we'll probably
avoid the question of extinction yeah
redundant anyway so um now with regards
to politics and vegan activist II in the
modern I guess marketplace of ideas how
exactly do you think we should be doing
it and well first of all how do you
think it's going right now well I have
mixed feelings with the state of being
activism it's it's better than it's ever
been in the past and yet it's it's
pretty terrible it's pretty pathetic at
this so you know what things are things
are better than ever been in the past
and when I talk to people were over
overly cynical or overly pessimistic
about it I point that out how much
better the situation is now than it ever
was previously the the main comparisons
I use are two successful movements for
social cultural and legal change like
gay rights I also like to use examples
of moves to ban cigarette smoking to
change the culture of smoking cigarettes
but also to change laws you know there
have been legal changes you're not
allowed to smoke and in various places
and even a change
seatbelt regulation these things all
have in common that their movements that
were based on small minorities of people
to totally non-violence there was no
civil war so some vegans including
Wayans young and director action
everywhere including to some extent
carry Franchione and the abolitionists
even the word abolitionist that's based
on a comparison to the abolition of
slavery in the history the United States
of America and it's specifically slavery
in the United States of America not not
Sri Lanka not Thailand
country's abolish slavery not just
America but it's based on that one
narrative
well the abolition of slavery in the
United States of America involved a
civil war with that killed a very
significant percentage of the population
yeah and it's also worthwhile to note it
was a civil war predominantly fought by
white people against other white people
and there were black combatants I'm not
saying there were zero but under saying
when you look at the economics of the
war of who paid for it and the number of
people who lay down their lives it's
very significant to note there were
there were these were mostly white
people fighting over this this issue
that's the horrible reality of the the
civil war it's better to say that it's
not the same as for instance in Haiti in
the Caribbean slavery was ended in Haiti
by black people rising up and killing
the white people it was a that was a
slave rebellion not a white on white
slave owners civil war this model has
absolutely zero applicability to the
current or future situation of veganism
and the instead by contrast the type of
lobbying the type of struggle for for
social political change that gay rights
just went through within my lifetime
it's a wonderful positive example how
many people were really involved in the
gay rights movement was it even 1% was
it 2% involved or or activists at all a
very very very small percentage of
people were directly involved in in the
gay rights movement how many people even
cared like most of the public was
indifferent and of course some people
were actively homophobic and then a very
very tough you know argument to make in
convincing the majority to to entertain
the legal changes they wanted and and
what-have-you um I remember being told
in school when I was in junior high one
of the professor's in junior high gave
his certain teachers in junior high gave
his official denunciation of homosexuals
and his explanation for why homosexuals
should not be allowed to be
schoolteachers and his argument
basically was built on the assumption
that all homosexuals are pedophiles -
all arguing against that in the 1980s
was very tough trying to convince
governments and people that no it was
perfectly safe for a gay man
to be a to be a schoolteacher that being
a gay man or a married gay man or
something you know who has sex with
other development is not the same as
being a pederast or a pedophile or being
a threat to the student but that's
really not it's not in the 1980s or
1970s or 1960s it was not an easy
argument to make that actually it should
be a civil a civil right to be openly
gay while being a schoolteacher so
that's tough
now I'm only mentioning how tough that
is because I think a lot of vegans think
it's it's really tough to convince
people to stop drinking cow milk and
start drinking soy milk you know I guess
I mean I guess it's tough I don't think
quitting cow milk is nearly as tough as
quitting cigarette smoking cigarettes
movies - I don't think quitting cow milk
is nearly as tough as quitting
homophobia you know and that may sound
like an ugly person but we we culturally
you know homophobia was part of an image
of strength and virility what it meant
to be a man and in this example I used
also taking care of your children and
defending your children against
corruption and evil there's a sense of
morality and all this stuff packaged up
and sexual and at the end all of it
these are huge you know difficult
cultural transitions and a small
minority of people who were well
organized and cared about them
passionately brought about those forms
of cultural change without a civil war
and - I think basically democratic and
transparent means maybe maybe there's
some some footnote there but you know it
wasn't through violent revolution or so
that for me is the road forward for
veganism and you know can you accomplish
a vegan world there's going to be a
whole series of small victories that
draw attention to the basic concepts
underlying principles of veganism before
you get any any big victories but sure
I'll give you a small victory we could
have a 20% tax on leather shoes
and you can have a negative tax 20% off
any shoes that are completely non
leather that are completely vegan we and
partly this is because leather is now
obsolete and even just in debating that
you'd be making people who are hey you
may see leather boots as something
invisible as a status symbol that's part
of daily life but if you can engage the
public in a debate about that law and
realize wow leather is unnecessary it's
obsolete it's hard to take care of it's
expensive it releases toxins into the
air
most people don't know chromium hexane
it's bad for the workers who create it
and there's this you know unbelievable
you know animal Holocaust thing going on
in the background - you might be in
resonance
you know their ecological as well as
ethical arguments um the lead-up I mean
in the same way the most the most
important thing about gay marriage
probably was the debate before the law
was passed was engaging the public in a
debate about homosexuality and future
society probably the debate you'd have
leading up to passing a law like that
would be more significant and that is
how veganism will make progress um
that's that's my claim beautiful well I
think I was absolutely fantastically
said thinking it's time to wrap things
up is we're rebels be two and a half
hour mark so much for coming on that's
been absolutely fantastic uh totally
conversation for the one was expect now
but I hope it's good for hope if your
viewers and you know the other thing I'd
say is one of the reasons I'm talking to
Darren ultimately I'm out here to
recruit talent the kind of social
political change I'm talking about you
know it's gonna involve small groups of
people who have high levels of trust and
cooperation and I don't know what the
future holds for you but I'm not
planning to disappear whether it's five
years or ten years from now I'm out here
on the Internet I'm not making money out
of YouTube but what I'm hoping to do is
find colleagues find talent and in the
future you know we can save the planet
all the more it comes down to the
discussion but do you think you'd be um
you'd be good to have another stream
sometime in the future corpse meet a
bunch of post graduate so I'm hoping to
have about a maza men
the second in the very early parts of
the stream he has a master's he was a
philosopher but he's retired now I'm
open-minded sure I'm open to that kind
of thing and just gonna rely on my
travel schedule my work schedule because
I'm going to France in a couple of weeks
now but otherwise sure Darren I'm happy
today's subject by the way will be
objective morality it should be perhaps
next week ish maybe the week after that
I want to make sure that everyone's
given sufficient notice and on top of
that just to end this dream as well I
would like to say special thanks to my
patrons Janice speed and yeah but yeah
thank you so much guys you guys have
been absolutely amazing
shout out to giant lolly you're amazing
thank you so much and yeah thank you so
much guys for watching I hope this has
been educational I hope it's perhaps
advance your thought at least a little
bit and perhaps you will have a
different approach to activism in the
future perhaps you have different pros
to politics in the future perhaps you
have the different approaches to
philosophy in the future perhaps you'll
be more interested in philosophy so I
hope you've learned a little bit here
and there from what we've discussed and
I'd like to say just you guys are
amazing